## Place Perception and Social Interaction on an Exurban Landscape in Central Colorado*

Soren C. Larsen

University of Missouri-Columbia

## Curt Sorenson, Dave McDermott and Joshua Long

University of Kansas

Chris Post

University of Georgia

An assumption commonly made in research on exurbanization is that the subdivision of land ownership necessarily creates a socially divisive landscape devoid of shared place perceptions and concerns. This article presents the results of an ethnography project undertaken in a former Colorado ranching valley that is currently exurbanizing. The study revealed not only the emergence of social networks and groups among new residents, but also the presence of distinct themes in place perception and assessment within these assemblages. In particular, the results indicated that concerns about natural hazards and environmental limitations have motivated new residents to interact with one another. Key Words: Colorado, exurbanization, place perception, rural change, self-directed photography.

E xurban development is one of the most vexing issues confronting rural North America today. The phenomenon differs from suburbanization-the steady, uninterrupted expansion of residences and retail facilities from an urban core-in that it involves scattered, isolated pockets of residential development some distance from an urban center in areas possessing high aesthetic values and natural amenities. Real-estate developers rely on distinctive place imagery and nationwide marketing campaigns to sell subdivided ranches and farms to prospective buyers, a process that Park and Coppack (1994, 168) have dubbed more generally as the ''iconization and commodification of rurality.'' Exurbanization has been particularly intense in the western United States: areas of central and western Colorado, New Mexico, and Montana, as well as northern Nevada and parts of Utah, experienced population growth rates of more than 15 percent in the 1990s, a trend particularly concentrated in areas that offer ''striking'' landscapes near undeveloped federal lands (Purdy 1999).

Exurban developments produce a number of environmental problems that turn on the difficulties of managing an increasingly fragmented landscape. Particularly in the American West, rural subdivision can place tremendous pressures on water, vegetation, and wildlife while straining the infrastructure with demands for additional roads, expanded fire services, and more intricate public-land management schemes. Exurban residents often move into arid or otherwise marginal ecosystems with little understanding of the limitations (e.g., water scarcity) or hazards (e.g., fire and wildlife) they may face. Many scholars believe that this problem is exacerbated because new residents fail to interact with one another and with long-term residents (Romme 1997; Gosnell, Haggerty, and Travis 2006). These residents, it is believed, are not exchanging critical environmental knowledge or developing shared perspectives on the landscape, a phenomenon that can frustrate regional conservation efforts (Gosnell, Haggerty, and Travis 2006). But are all exurban areas characterized by social fragmentation?

*This research was made possible by generous support from the University of Kansas Department of Geography and the University of Missouri Center for Arts &amp; Humanities. The authors thank Elaine Lawless, Jim Whitworth, Matt Foulkes, Hilary Hungerford, Jason Dittmer, Mark Bowen, and the anonymous reviewers whose critiques on an earlier draft produced a stronger final manuscript. All remaining errors and omissions are the responsibility of the authors.

And how does living in an exurban setting over time change one's perceptions of the place? Little research has explored how new residents interact with one another and perceive their chosen environment. As policymakers attempt to address the difficulties inherent in exurban transitions, they will require a robust and grounded understanding of exurban residents themselves.

This article presents the results of a team ethnography project featuring the technique of self-directed photography (photographs taken by residents) in Garden Park, Colorado, a 16 km 2 valley with twenty-eight households several miles north of Can ˜ on City (Figure 1). Wedesignedourstudytoprovide a fine-grained understanding of how shortand long-term residents interact with one another and perceive their environment. Following an overview of the forces driving exurbanization, we describe the social networks and small groups in Garden Park, discuss how and why they formed, and document their influence on environmental perception and decision making. We use the results from self-directed photography to examine the different ways residents signified and assessed the landscape, particularly the changes associated with exurban development. In addition, we draw on qualitative analysis to identify distinct perceptual themes circulating within the small groups. T aken together, these aspects present a complex and evolving situation that at once confirms and challenges contemporary interpretations of exurbia as a highly fragmented social landscape. Resident-employed photography in particular provides not only a fascinating glimpse of evolving place perceptions amid rapid change but also a way to intervene productively in the exurban transition. In the final section of the article, we discuss how we shared the photographs in an open forum with valley residents, and how this event enhanced existing social relationships and catalyzed a grassroots effort to restore a public space on the landscape.

## Background Literature

The restructuring of agriculture after the Second World War created opportunities for exurban real-estate markets to emerge and flourish in North America (Davis, Nelson, and Dueker 1994; Knight, Gilgert, and Marston 2002). 1 A growing portion of middle-class Americans reacted to the stresses of urban life in the postwar era by using surplus income to purchase properties in rural areas with abundant natural amenities. These urbanites were motivated by, among other things, the relatively low cost of rural land, the lack of regulation often found in nonmetropolitan places, and the ability to use high-speed Internet access to work from a home in the country (Davis, Nelson, and Dueker 1994; Crump 2003; Grubesic and Murray 2004; Byun and Esparza 2005; Carruthers and Vias 2005). Some residents pursued agricultural hobbies such as livestock and viticulture, others focused on recreational or aesthetic modifications to their properties (Smith and Sharp 2005). These diverse uses and amenities led residents to settle in different parts of the exurban environment, which, in turn, has contributed to exurban sprawl, known colloquially as ''leapfrog'' or ''checkerboard'' development (Romme 1997; Kuz and James 1998; Vogt and Marans 2004). Developers promote this sprawl as they seek to avoid the negative externalities of overcrowding, which clutters the landscape and thereby depreciates the aesthetic (and consequently, market) value of property (Esparza and Carruthers 2000; Irwin and Bockstael 2002).

Garden Park presents a fairly typical example of exurban development. Anglo immigrants resettled the area shortly after Can ˜ on City was founded in 1859. The valley supported smallscale gardening and ranching, and residents found a regional niche by shipping fresh produce and beef along the perilous Shelf Road to miners in the Cripple Creek-Victor area some twenty miles to the north. Valley residents shifted to small-scale ranching (a dozen to 200 head of cattle) and alfalfa hay production following the drop-off in mining activity in the early 1900s ( Johnson, McMaster, and Sorenson 1980). Although the exact numbers changed over the years, the valley typically supported seven to ten ranching households. Beginning in the 1960s, changing market conditions and higher production costs prompted many of these ranchers to obtain supplementary income through parttime employment in Can ˜ on City (Hopkins 1998; Schnell et al. 2004). Several ranchers carved off small pieces of their properties for residential development, though this practice had created only four new properties by 1990. As primary-sector restructuring intensified, however, ranchers were forced to consider the

Figure1 Map of the study area.

<!-- image -->

more drastic measure of selling the entire ranch. T wo developers purchased large ranches in 1999 and 2001, eventually subdividing the land into fifty-five parcels of approximately thirty-five acres each. 2 The developers have sold all lots, and by August 2006 almost one-third ( n ¼ 18) of the buyers had built homes on their properties, with an additional two homes under construction. All indications are that more owners will be building homes over the next couple of

years, and at least two ranching families are in the final stages of negotiating large (thousand-acre) subdivisions for additional ranchettes.

Exurban developers such as those involved in Garden Park invoke images of an idyllic rural lifestyle to market stability, timelessness, and tranquility to middle-class consumers (Schnell et al. 2004). Motivated by images of pastoral solitude and rejuvenation in a natural setting, exurban property owners are believed to be less interested in forming community relationships than they are in cultivating personal landscape tastes and individual senses of identity (Spain 1993; Heath 1995; Park and Coppack 1994). High-acreage, low-density residential designs impede interaction in everyday life and thereby contribute to a lack of community in the exurbs (Romme 1997; McCormick 1998). Such features have led some critics to interpret these places as inauthentic (McLuhan and Fiore 1967; Relph 1976; Coppack 1988; Kunstler 1993; Park and Coppack 1994). Exurban environments have been likened to pseudo-rural ''theaters of consumption'' in which the relationships of place and communityamounttocontrivedperformancesof identity (Bunce 1981; Mormont 1990; Cloke and Goodwin 1992).

Already, a drive through Garden Park on FremontCountyRoad9revealswhatappearsto be, on the surface at least, ample evidence of this sort of social fragmentation and conspicuous consumption. The subdivisions feature rustic post-and-beam gated entrances that loom over the road, some with keypad entries and others with an assemblage of No Trespassing and Keep Out signs designed to exclude nonresidents. Thenewhousesinthesubdivisions are typically set back from the road, shielded from public view by vegetation or the slope of the land. If one stops to talk with the subdivision residents about their homes, they marvel over the dramatic mountainous setting and the sweeping views it affords. One couple, for instance, sited their home-a rustic Colorado line-cabin built from a prefabricated kit-to create a view of the Sangre de Christo Mountains some forty miles distant. The structure is wide and oriented to the south so that the Sangres are visible from the maximum possible number of windows as well as from the front porch. A large, low-register wind chime is designed to enhance this vista by creating an acoustic space that oscillates with wind intensity. Another family laughed about how they used a stepladder before building to get a sense of the views from different promontories on the property, ultimately electing to use an earthmover to build up the highest site so as to get a few feet more in elevation. The lawnscapes typically display personalized tastes for frontier and wilderness imagery such as decorative sections of rustic fences, statuettes of bears and deer, and stone markers. The ranch homes, by contrast, are huddled down in the bottomlands of Four Mile Creek. Often they are visible and accessible from the road, a situation that in the past invited casual social interaction (Schnell et al. 2004). Many of these homes appear to have become part of a relic landscape: somestructures are unoccupied and in disrepair, others look as if they are simply holding out until the day of the final sale.

Our ethnographic investigation, however, uncovered a more complex situation in Garden Park, one that challenges the simple division between a relic ranching landscape and the conspicuousness of newcomer developments. We began our research by questioning the assumption that subdividing large land parcels necessarily entails a fragmented social setting devoid of shared place perceptions and values. 3 Subdivision may diminish the overall social cohesiveness of these areas, but little empirical research has attempted to identify the actual patterns of social interaction and small-group perception among exurbanites. Indeed, ethnographic research on exurban transitions is rare (see, however, Walker and Fortmann 2003). Our research, then, was motivated by an attempt to document how interpersonal relationships, collective practices, and shared landscape images have been reorganized amid exurbanization. In so doing, our hope was to capture how individuals actually perceive, negotiate, and respond to exurbanization, both over time and in everyday life, and how in the process they forge and maintain relationships with each other and their chosen place.

## Methods and Results

The main research took place during the summer of 2005, although it drew on results from annual summer fieldwork conducted since the late 1990s (Schnell et al. 2004). We designed our study to document and interpret the formation of social networks and small groups in the valley

and to explore variations in place perception within and between these networks and groups. Symbolic interactionism provided an appropriate theoretical framework because it focused the research effort on how individuals establish relationships with the people and objects in their everyday lives (Shibutani 1961; Ley 1974; Samuels 1978; Charon 1979). Using the dynamics of individual experience as a starting point, interactionism examines how environmental meanings cohere as people interact in small groups, knownintheinteraction literature as ''reference groups'' (Ley 1974). Routine communication and interaction tend to generate increasingly shared understandings out of the range of diverse individual experiences, thereby contributing to common symbolic references and collective senses of place. Despite their relatively low populations, nonmetropolitan communities typically contain several different reference groups, each operating under a different understanding of what it means to be rural (Harper 1987).

Our first step in the research, then, was to detect the reference groups in the valley. We accomplished this by using interviews and participant observation to map out the actual social relationships that residents have formed with one another. 4 We asked the residents to distinguish between short-term acquaintances, working relationships with infrequent interaction, and working relationships with frequent interaction. Using the last two types of relationship as indicators, we identified four reference groups whose members indicated strong patterns of interaction with one another: (1) the ranchers; (2) long-term (ten years or more) nonagricultural residents; (3) subdivision residents with legal rights to draw irrigation water from Four Mile Creek; and (4) an emerging social network in each of the two subdivisions. We tested the reliability of these conclusions by triangulating residents' self-reports within the groups and by conducting weeks of participant observation over the course of two field seasons in 2005 and 2006. We then used interviews to explore why the subdivision residents in particular had organized themselves into these groups. All of the residents with irrigation rights indicated that the appropriation and conservation of water from Four Mile Creek had prompted frequent interaction. The other subdivision residents indicated that initial acquaintances were made in homeowners' association meetings, but that concerns about fire and wildlife ( particularly bears and rattlesnakes) accounted for most ( just over 90 percent) of the working relationships. We discovered only one relationship that developed from propinquity alone (two neighbors that had become friends). Our final tallies indicated that ranchers reported an average of 9.25 relationships with other valley residents; long-term nonagricultural residents reported 7.1 relationships; and subdivision residents reported 3.6 relationships.

We used self-directed photography to unearth variations in preferred landscape imagery within and between these groups. Developed by Aitken and Wingate (1993), this technique is similar to Photovoice in health-access studies and visitor-employed photography in recreation scholarship (Cherem and Driver 1983; Chenoweth 1984; Haywood 1990; Goin 2001; WangandRedwood-Jones 2001; Side 2005). In most approaches, the researcher gives participants disposable cameras and asks them to take photographs related to the topic of interest. Interpretation is pursued through follow-up interviews or by having the participants provide brief written descriptions of each photograph. Researchers have reported that self-directed photography enables residents to capture the multilayered meanings and visual references that constitute their complex attachments to locale (Aitken and Wingate 1993; Stedman et al. 2004). The images typically display an assemblage of social and natural elements, which allows for an exploration of the nature-culture connections that underpin place relationships.

In this study, we asked the participants to take photographs of landscape and community features they found significant, and that specifically contributed to their personal feelings toward the valley. We asked for a minimum of ten photographs; participants averaged fourteen photographs each (each camera allowed twenty-seven exposures). We gave the residents as much time as they needed to complete the task, which usually entailed one or two weeks with the camera. The original goal was to have participation from all twenty-eight households in the valley, but the timing of our research ( July and August) meant that several residents were on vacation or visiting relatives. Consequently, we conducted our research within a stratified sample of sixteen households that ensured

proportional representation from each reference group: ranchers ( four participating households out of a total of five); long-term nonagricultural residents (two participating households out of a total of three); subdivision residents with legal rights to draw irrigation water (three participating households out of a total of four); and subdivision residents without those rights (seven participating households out of a total of sixteen). In addition, we conducted interviews with two individuals who were not part of the sample but nonetheless wanted to express their perspectives. We therefore conductedeighteen interviews, or approximately 65 percent of the total households in the valley. 5

reference groups. Finally, we identified and coded for basic categories of objects ( farm equipment, home and lawn decorations, etc.) present in the photographs.

Wedeveloped a structured coding scheme of the objects, landscapes, and themes that appeared in the images. Upon an initial review of the photographs, we noticed that the images were of two basic types: (1) normative landscape scenes (what the resident thought the landscape ought to look like; what parts of the valley are aesthetically or emotionally pleasing); and (2) diagnostic assessments of the landscape (what features or elements indicate problems or concerns in the valley). We developed the photographs and returned to each household for a second interview, at which time we worked with the participants to determine whether each image represented a normative landscape scene or a diagnostic assessment. For the former type, we asked participants to identify the values and perspectives they were trying to communicate with their landscape scenes. Following the conclusion of fieldwork, we grouped similar landscape images across the photograph sets to determine if normative themes were associated with specific reference groups. We also used the interviews to identify and explore residents' diagnostic assessments of the landscape. Again, after the completion of fieldwork we compared themes across the photograph sets to detect which patterns were associated with specific

The combined photography and interview results support the idea that although individual variations in normative and diagnostic place imagery certainly exist, most reference groups possessed distinctive frameworks for perceiving, interacting with, and evaluating the landscape (Table 1). Some groups were more coherent than others in their image preferences and assessments. Not surprisingly, the normative landscape view found across all ranchers' photographs was that of production; the typical scene was one of alfalfa fields, farming equipment, and the irrigation systems that bring in water from Four Mile Creek. Remarkably, though, only one rancher produced diagnostic images concerning subdivision and exurban development; the issue of concern for ranchers was instead the careful and prudent management of water. Diagnostic images, for instance, featured headgates, sluices, rain gauges, and Four Mile Creek itself. It was the two longterm, nonagricultural residents who generated diagnostic images concerning the threats posed by subdivision. Their photographs concentrated on the new post-and-beam gated entrances, the increased traffic on County Road 9, and the clutter created by development (represented, for instance, by new mailboxes and signposts). The subdivision residents who have rights to draw irrigation water generated strikingly similar images of a natural-productive landscape (the participants themselves defined this preferred view as a landscape that blends nature and agriculture into an aesthetically pleasing whole). Like the ranchers, though, the overriding diagnostic landscape concern for these participants was the careful and collective management of water from Four Mile Creek. Finally, the subdivision residents without water

Table1 Resident-employed photography coding results

| Group                                                                                                 | Landscape themes                                            | Landscape themes             | Landscape themes                                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                       | Normative                                                   | Diagnostic                   | Object(s)                                                                  |
| Ranchers Long-term residents Subdivision residents Subdivision residents with irrigation-water rights | Production Not discernable Mountain view Natural-production | Water Development Fire Water | Farming equipment Not discernable Home, lawn ornament Irrigation equipment |

rights also produced similar landscape treatments depicting the mountain views taken from their properties. The perspective taken in these normative landscape scenes was that of a distant andsweepinggazeacrossthevalley,andtheonly effort made to include human elements was the occasional placement of home or lawn ornaments in the foreground. Fire was the issue of diagnostic concern for these participants: four of the seven subdivision residents took images of signs warning of fire danger or of a public campground in the area where it was feared that careless campers might inadvertently start a blaze. In the next section, we discuss the photographs and interviews from within each reference group, starting with the ranchers, interpreting these results as responses to a rapidly changing valley landscape.

## Discussion

The ranchers' photographs and interviews reveal their reactions to the rapid changes on the landscape as it began to exurbanize in the 1990s. Many of the photographs concentrate on what remains of ranching life in the valley. Three of the photographers-one male and two females-focused the cameras on their ranches and, in particular, the elements that make a productive landscape: tractors, fuel tanks, trucks, horses, and cattle. One of the ranchers highlighted the use of water from Four Mile Creek; this photograph set contained twelve images (more than 80 percent of the total) of irrigation ditches, headgates, and the creek itself. These ranchers indicated that the portrayal of a productive landscape was not an explicit goal of theirs, but simply represented whatthey knewand were familiar with. Indeed, they took their photographs from the bottomlands, and concentrated their cameras on the fields and pastures of the valley floor. In addition, ranchers often used their photographs in interviews to convey nonvisual senses of the landscape: the thick odor of manure, for example, or the sound of birds in the morning. This multisensory approach differs markedly from the distinctly visual perspective taken by manyof the newcomers whose images gaze down on the valley from a ridgetop perch.

Although these ranchers focused on economic production, their normative landscape conception nonetheless does possess an aesthetic sensibility in which beauty is assigned to livedin places. As one of the photographers put it,

Right outside my window, when the rainwater comes rushing over those red cliffs, I've got one of the prettiest views you could ever want. But we didn't come here to look at the view, so we kind of take it for granted.

Instead of photographing the cliffs, this rancher elected to focus the camera on the alfalfa fields and her modest but well-manicured yard. With its grass, hedgerows, and evenly spaced orchard trees, the yard represents a small-scale version of the productive garden landscape that the ranchers sought to create throughout the valley (Figure 2). According to the photographer, it

Figure2 Normative image of the landscape in production; photograph by female rancher.

<!-- image -->

Figure3 Diagnostic image of the valley in decay; photograph by female rancher.

<!-- image -->

stands in stark contrast to the ostentatious yards of new residents.

The photographs, however, also exhibit the ranchers' understandings of their changing relationships to each other and the valley as it undergoes exurban development. One rancher used most of the photography experiment to depict Garden Park as a vacated, empty place despite the influx of new exurban residents. The sheer intentionality on her part conveys a more politicized interpretation of the valley, one that differs markedly from the straightforward landscape-in-production theme. The images depict, as she put it, a ''dying community'': a clump of dead, red-needled pin ˜ on pine trees infested with beetles; a field no longer in production; a dilapidated barn; her vacant childhood home; the schoolhouse with its plastered exterior cracked to reveal the bricks underneath (Figure 3). The final images focus on an area that few new residents have visited or even seen: the community cemetery. Hidden from view, a traveler along County Road 9 would not know it even existed. Six photographs take us into this sacred space, a last vestige of insidedness that at the same time serves as a tangible realization of the death of community. This photographer's intent, however, was more than an emotional device, but rather part of a political project. It currently costs only $10 for a plot in the Garden Park Cemetery, and many of the elderly ranchers have balked at raising the price to an amount that would divert new residents-should they eventually discover the place and wish to be buried there-to find a plot in Can ˜ on City. So, under this woman's leadership, the community board (consisting of ranching families who oversee the few remaining spaces of public concern) changed the regulations such that acquisition of a plot requires at least five years of uninterrupted residence. ''So when these new people come to live here [in the future subdivision], they will have to live on my land for at least five years before they can get in there'' [emphasis in the original interview].

The twenty-three families of ''newcomers'' have lived in the valley for two decades or less; most reside in the subdivisions. The longest tenure for a newcomer is twenty years; others are still building their homes. Most of these people are year-round residents, and, at present, property turnover has been low: a survey of property records from the Fremont County Assessors Office indicated that just over 80 percent of the original landowners have retained their properties since subdivision began. Interviews identified three distinct reference groups among the new residents. According to residents' own reports, the most cohesive of these consists of four families sharing an irrigation ditch with 1896 water rights on Four Mile Creek. The families are engaged in small-scale haying and livestock operations, and their points of origin-Michigan, the Colorado

Front Range, California-are characteristically diverse. Y et the fact that they share a resource has engendered a more regular form of social interaction than that found among any of the other new residents. By the very act of acquiring property with associated water rights, these new residents were thrust into a relationship with their neighbors, a relationship on which they have opted to build in an effort to conserve a scarce resource. In this sense, the group could be said to represent a version, in process if not in kind, of the ranching community, which also emerged from the sort of internalized transactions fostered by concerns over resource allocations.

Thephotographs taken by the members of this small group are strikingly similar in their treatment of the landscape, which, when read against the interview data, suggests a convergence of meanings and perspectives through intensive interaction. Although the elements characteristic to other newcomer images (homes and personal artifacts) do appear, water is by far the overriding concernacrossthephotographsets.Inthisregard, these images most closely resemble, in content and perspective, those taken by the ranchers depicting a diagnostic concern for water management. The three new residents focused their lenses on irrigation pipes and drilling wells, electric fences for livestock, culverts, and Four Mile Creek. Strikingly, not one of them took a photograph of the mountain views, which though not immediately available from their properties are readily captured on County Road 9 or in the popular Red Canyon Park nearby. Water, not the view, is the landscape issue of common concern, and interviews revealed that these residents have developed channels of communication that ensure use of a collective resource in a way that supports their private ambitions. They share farming equipment, for instance, and have granted easements on private property that enable other users to access the headgate on the creek.

Less cohesive social groups are emerging in the subdivisions. Residents there have made efforts to modify collective landscaping norms and provide social services by working through the homeowner's association. Some, for example, wanted to relax the restrictions on exterior house color originally outlined in the developer's covenant, which mandated that only ''colors of nature'' (adobe reds and autumnal browns) were acceptable. Although the debate that followed-is white a color of nature?-was super- ficial on one level, it also represented an attempt to expand the conceptualization of the landscape beyond the developer's preconceived construction of the place. Other residents have focused on the need for local fire services in the valley. Some estimated that it would take the Can ˜ on City Fire Department as long as forty minutes to reach the northernmost houses, a delay that could be disastrous. A related problem is that although a landowner can cut and thin vegetation on the property, the work might be of little value during a major fire if surrounding properties are thick with pin ˜ on-juniper woodland. Consequently, efforts are being made to develop common landscaping practices that will reduce the risk of fire in the subdivision as a whole.

Thephotographsindicatethattheseactivities have generated some measure of collective environmental understanding. Four residents, for instance, took photographs concerning the likely prospect for wildfire. Interviews with these and other residents revealed the socially unifying role of fire threats. Residents have consulted not only local experts but also ranchers and other subdivision dwellers on techniques of reducing fire risk, and then have committed to the same demanding work of clearing brush that their neighbors must endure. Referring to his photographs, one homeowner related that the entire process of cutting limbs, hauling them to the driveway, and running them through a chipper is slow and tiring, and that it runs counter to his expectations of a relaxed existence in the mountains. But even more distressing is that it grates against his normative conception of a wilderness landscape; as he put it, ''It's hard for a flatlander from T exas to cut down trees.'' T wo of his images highlight this landscape transformation by depicting thinned stands of juniper-pine woodland as well as the thick brush piles prepared for chipping near the driveway. He noted that most everyone in the valley has to do this sort of work, and that Can ˜ on City residents and visitors to Garden Park simply do not understand the ever-present threat for wildfire in the summer. Clearing woodland for fire protection, then, appears to be facilitating a new sense of insider identity among at least some subdivision residents. In a similar fashion, some residents have developed the practice of calling one another to report wildlife sightings in the vicinity, particularly black bear and bobcat.

Figure4 Diagnostic image of threats posed by exurban development; photograph by long-term, nonagricultural male resident.

<!-- image -->

The photographs taken by the long-term, nonagricultural residents depict how exurban development threatens their strong attachments to the place. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the case of a couple that moved to the area in 1976 from Long Island and purchased a small, square slump-block house from a ranching family. The two soon became friends with other members of the community and experienced many of the same aspects of valley life as ranchers did: they received mail only three days a week; they used a primitive wood stove for heat; and they shared a three-person ''party'' telephone line with two other families. Their images feature few landscape scenes, but rather diagnostic elements that indicate a strong anxiety about exurban development. One photograph, for instance, depicts the looming postand-beam gateway to a development located adjacent to their property. Referring to this photograph, the couple reported that the subdivision properties are elevated high above their house, which underscores the sense of intimidation apparent in the image. The perspective in this and other photographs in the set emphasizes how the subdivision gates appear beyond human scale, looming over the rest of the valley (Figure 4). Another series of images features the clusters of mailboxes at the subdivision entrances, an arrangement the couple said reflects the secluded nature of these residential spaces, rather than individual properties that have accessible, roadside entrances (and therefore, mailboxes).

Similarly, another image depicts the ubiquitous entrance signage warning against trespassing, again highlighting the secluded quality of the subdivisions. Taken together, these images reflect a highly charged sense of place: nominal newcomers who see a valley, their valley, under threat from exurban encroachment.

## Conclusions

Our study reveals concurrent trends toward fragmentation and new forms of social interaction in Garden Park. Although we found expected perceptual differences between the photograph sets of short- and long-term residents, significant variations existed among the newcomers that reflect the emergence of reference groups based on routine patterns of social interaction. These groups shared distinctive landscape concerns, and some had cultivated common interpretations of the place and its normative value. And while ranchers clearly related to a landscape in production, new understandings had materialized with the advent of exurbanization.

Newresidents are forming relationships with one another precisely because they know so little about the natural hazards and environmental limitations they confront. The results, in other words, reveal the socially unifying role of environmental threats: residents cited concerns over fire, water, and wildlife as especially strong motivators for interacting with one other. Our

findings, then, suggest that the problem in Garden Park is not that new residents are failing to form social bonds, although some participants clearly valued their isolation and seclusion. Instead, the issue at hand is that new residents are negotiating their collective landscape concerns from the perspective of the subdivision association or irrigation ditch, not from that of the valley as a whole. Fragmentation is occurring through the reference groups as their members arrive at different landscape agreements through homeowner's associations, water-use protocols, fire-protection schemes, and prescriptions for wildlife interaction. The potential problem, then, is not a completely disjointed and individualized landscape occupied by people who are so ensnared by image consumption that they ignore environmental realities or fail to connect with the place or with each other. Instead, the issue concerns the emergence of multiple reference groups that are independently conceptualizing, interacting with, and modifying the landscape.

The final phase of our ethnographic work in the 2005 season was to invite the research participants to the fieldcamp facility for a dinner and informal showing of the photographs. We transferred the photographs, unidentified, to four laptop computers and made them available for small-group viewing in the main dining hall. The reception originally was designed as a simple ''thank-you'' to the participants, but we were immediately struck by the quality of social interaction as new and old residents gathered around the computers to view their own photographs. It soon became apparent to all of us just how much the abandoned schoolhouse was valued by both short- and long-term residents, although for different reasons. Encouraged by this revelation, follow-up fieldwork in 2006 revealed that over the winter several ''new'' and ''old'' residents had launched an effort to restore the building and transform it into a volunteer fire department using their own funds as well as a state grant designed for the purpose. The first phase of the restoration, shoring up the dilapidated structure, has been completed, and large blue tarps have been hung over the west and south-facing walls to protect the plaster from additional decay. When asked in summer 2006 about the strange new color on the schoolhouse, one elderly rancher replied simply, ''It looks like somebody finally cares.'' Sharing the photo- graphs also prompted another rancher to consider transferring part of his property to a conservation easement, which would maintain critical riparian habitat for wildlife and scenery (valued by newcomers, as expressed in their photographs) along Four Mile Creek.

Ethnographic research in exurbia, then, has the potential to reveal the forms of social interaction that emerge despite the fragmentation of land ownership. Resident-employed photographyinparticular not only offers a way to unearth the fine-grained variations and patterns in place perception, but also an opportunity to intervene in the exurban transition itself by facilitating productive, resident-led change. It is worth noting that Garden Park possesses some unique characteristics-small population size, low levels of property turnover, accommodating ranchers-that may have encouraged a more peaceful exurban transition than that found in other areas (see, e.g., Walker and Fortmann 2003). Nonetheless, by taking photographs of the landscapes they hold dear and of the places they know or are coming to know, these residents are identifying common places of concern and initiating collective projects that have the potential for landscape-level management in the valley. In so doing, they are creating a new environmentthat, while certainly different from the ranchers' world, does hold greater potential for the long-term social and ecological sustainability of this strikingly beautiful but extraordinarily fragile place.

## Notes

1 In addition to the deflationary effects of such industrialization on commodities markets, skyrocketing energy prices in the 1970s elevated costs for smallscale production schemes that increasingly involved expensive technology, fertilizers and petrochemicals, and longer distances to market. Farmers and ranchers also faced more personal pressures-accumulating debts, high inheritance taxes, and increasingly attractive offers from developers-all of which compounded the situation. The affluence of white-collar professionals increased after the war, evident in rising real incomes, easier access to credit, and the investment opportunities afforded by surplus wealth. 2 Therationalefor the standard 35-acre lot size is 1972 Colorado Senate Bill 35, which exempts any lot of that size or larger from county zoning ordinances. Developers are therefore not required to provide utilities, meaning that buyers are responsible for

- drilling their own water wells, a procedure that can cost as much as $30,000 per well.
- 3 Gosnell, Haggerty, and Travis (2006) discuss at length how this assumption factors into scholarship on the ecological effects of exurbanization and the conservation issues related to these settings.
- 4 It should be noted that we were able to include those residents who were not interviewed if a participant indicated a social relationship with them.
- 5 Three of us have spent considerable time over the years in Garden Park working with ranchers and other residents on a variety of projects related to landscape change, a time depth that aided in securing participation and in interpreting the interview and photography results.

## Literature Cited

- Aitken, S., and J. Wingate. 1993. A preliminary study of the self-directed photography of middle-class, homeless, and mobility-impaired children. The Professional Geographer 45 (1): 65-72.
- Bunce,M.1981.Ruralsentimentandtheambiguityof the rural-urban fringe. In The rural-urban fringe: Canadian perspectives , ed. K. Beesley and L. Russwurm, 109-20. T oronto: York University.
- Byun, P., and A. X. Esparza. 2005. A revisionist model of suburbanization and sprawl. Journal of Planning Education and Research 24 (3): 252-64.
- Carruthers, J., and A. Vias. 2005. Urban, suburban, and exurban sprawl in the Rocky Mountain West: Evidence from regional adjustment models. Journal of Regional Science 45 (1): 21-48.
- Charon, J. M. 1979. Symbolic interactionism: An introduction, an interpretation, an integration . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Chenoweth, R. 1984. Visitor employed photography: A potential tool for landscape architecture. Landscape Journal 3:136-43.
- Cherem, G., and B. Driver. 1983. Visitor employed photography: A technique to measure common perceptions of natural environments. Journal of Leisure Research 15:65-83.
- Cloke, P., and M. Goodwin. 1992. Conceptualizing countryside change: From post-Fordism to rural structured coherence. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 17 (3): 321-36.
- Coppack, P. 1988. Reflections on the role of amenity in the evolution of the urban field. Geografiska Annaler B 70:353-61.
- Crump, J. R. 2003. Finding a place in the country: Exurban and suburban development in Sonoma County, California. Environment and Behavior 35 (2): 187-202.
- Davis, J., A. Nelson, and K. Dueker. 1994. The new 'burbs: The exurbs and their implications for planning policy. Journal of the American Planning Association 60 (1): 45-59.
- Esparza, A., and J. Carruthers. 2000. Land use planning in the rural Mountain West: Evidence from Arizona. Journal of Planning Education and Research 20:23-36.
- Goin, P. 2001. Visual literacy. Geographical Review 91 (1-2): 363-69.
- Gosnell,H., J. Haggerty, and W. Travis. 2006. Ranchland ownership change in the Greater Yellowstone ecosystem, 1990-2001: Implications for conservation. Society and Natural Resources 19:743-58.
- Grubesic, T., and A. Murray. 2004. Waiting for broadband: Local competition and the spatial distribution of advanced telecommunication services in the United States. Growth and Change 35 (2): 139-65.
- Harper, S. 1987. A humanistic approach to the study of rural populations. Journal of Rural Studies 3 (4): 309-19.
- Haywood, K. 1990. Visitor employed photography: Anurban visit assessment. Journal of Travel Research 29:25-29.
- Heath, T. 1995. Ranching the nouvelle West. Newsweek , February.
- Hopkins, J. 1998. Signs of the post-rural: Marketing myths of a symbolic countryside. Geografiska Annaler B 80 (2): 65-81.
- Irwin, E., and N. Bockstael. 2002. Interacting agents, spatial externalities and the evolution of residential land use patterns. Journal of Economic Geography 2:31-54.
- Johnson, W., R. McMaster, and C. Sorenson. 1980. Changing ranchland usage in Garden Park, Colorado. Great Plains-Rocky Mountain Geographical Journal 9:59-71.
- Knight, R., W. Gilgert, and E. Marston, eds. 2002. Ranching west of the 100th meridian: Culture, ecology, and economics . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Kunstler, J. H. 1993. The geography of nowhere: The rise and decline of America's man-made landscape . New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
- Kuz, T., and A. James. 1998. Population changes in southern Manitoba: Trends and policy implications 1971-1991. Canadian Journal of Urban Research 7 (1): 72-100.
- Ley, D. 1974. The Black inner city as frontier outpost: Images and behavior of a Philadelphia neighborhood . Washington, DC: Association of American Geographers.
- McCormick, K. 1998. Home, home on the ranchette. Planning 64 (2): 4-8.
- McLuhan, M., and Q. Fiore. 1967. The medium is the massage . New York: Bantam Books.
- Mormont,M.1990.Whoisrural?Or,howtoberural: Towards a sociology of the rural. In Rural restructuring: Global processes and their responses , ed. T. Marsden, P. Lowe, and S. Whatmore. London: David Fulton.
- Park, D., and P. Coppack. 1994. The role of rural sentiment and vernacular landscapes in contriving a

- sense of place within the city's countryside. Geografiska Annaler B 76 (3): 161-72.
- Purdy, J. 1999. The new culture of rural America. American Prospect 11 (3): 26-31.
- Relph, E. C. 1976. Place and placelessness . London: Pion. Romme, W. 1997. Creating pseudo-rural landscapes in the Mountain West. In Placing nature: Culture and landscape ecology , ed. J. I. Nassauer, 139-61. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Samuels, M. S. 1978. Existentialism and human geography. In Humanistic geography: Prospects and problems , ed. D. Ley and M. S. Samuels, 22-40. Chicago: Maaroufa Press.
- Schnell, S., C. Sorenson, S. Larsen, M. Dunbar, and E. McGrogan. 2004. Old West and New West in Garden Park, Colorado. Montana: The Magazine of Western History 54 (4): 32-47.
- Shibutani, T. 1961. Society and personality: An interactionist approach to social psychology . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
- Side, K. 2005. Snapshot on identity: Women's contributions addressing community relations in a rural Northern Irish district. Womens Studies International Forum 28 (4): 315-27.
- Smith, M., and J. Sharp. 2005. Growth, development, and farming in an Ohio exurban region. Environment and Behavior 37 (4): 565-79.
- Spain, D. 1993. Been-heres versus come-heres: Negotiating conflicting community identities. Journal of the American Planning Association 59 (2): 156-72.
- Stedman, R., T. Beckley, S. Wallace, and M. Ambard. 2004. A picture and 1000 words: Using residentemployed photography to understand attachment to high amenity places. Journal of Leisure Research 36 (4): 580-606.
- Vogt, C., and R. Marans. 2004. Natural resources and open space in the residential decision process: A study of recent movers to fringe counties in southeast Michigan. Landscape and Urban Planning 69 (2): 255-69.
- Walker, P., and L. Fortmann. 2003. Whose landscape? Apolitical ecology of the ''exurban'' Sierra. Cultural Geographies 10:469-91.
- Wang, C. C., and Y. A. Redwood-Jones. 2001. Photovoice ethics: Perspectives from Flint photovoice. Health Education &amp; Behavior 28 (5): 560-72.

SORENC. LARSEN is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211. E-mail: larsens@ missouri.edu. His research investigates the politics of place in nonmetropolitan regions of western Canada and the American West.

CURT SORENSEN is a soon-to-retire Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045. E-mail: csorensen@ku.edu.Hisresearchinterestsinvolvesoils and geomorphology. In 1976, he and Pete Shortridge started the field experience course from which this research evolved.

DAVE McDERMOTT is a graduate student in the Department of Geography at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045. E-mail: dcmcdermo@ku. edu. His research interests include North American cultural geography, environmental policy, and GIS.

JOSHUALONGisaPhDstudentandteacher in the Department of Geography at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045. E-mail: joshlong@ku.edu. His research interests include the geography of food and the rural-urban interface. He is currently researching local business promotion related to the Keep Austin Weird movement.

CHRISPOSTisaninstructor and faculty member in the Department of Geography at the University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602. E-mail: cpost@uga.edu. His research interests are in the cultural landscape ( particularly those of memorialization and exurbanization), historical geography of the United States, and sense of place.