

the  geographical  review

## TRADITIONAL ECOLOGIES OF THE OPIUM POPPY AND ORAL HISTORY IN RURAL TURKEY*

## KYLE T. EVERED

abstract. Cultivated in the Eastern Mediterranean region for millennia, the opium poppy ( Papaver somniferum ) was profoundly significant in the economies, ecologies, cultures, and diets of the peoples of many towns and villages of rural Anatolia. When the United States compelled Turkey to eradicate cultivation of the plant in the early  s in order to diminish the flow of heroin into America, farmers were obliged to deal with not only changes in their incomes but also profound changes in their relationships with the land and the state. Although Turkish officials later allowed production to resume in a highly controlled manner for pharmaceutical purposes, significant socioeconomic and ecological dimensions of Turkey's poppy-growing communities were forever changed. Interviewing now-retired poppy farmers, I employ oral history as my primary source of historical evidence to reconstruct these past ecologies and associated social relationships and to give voice to the informants. Keywords: narcotics, opium poppy, oral history, political ecology, Turkey.

B y the late  s international narcotics trade constituted a major political issue at a national scale in the United States. In that context President Richard M. Nixon declared America's first 'war on drugs' in  . The flow of Turkish heroin into the United States was the initial target in this campaign of law enforcement and foreign policy. Although various histories dealt with policies in the era of President Nixon and President Gerald R. Ford vis-à-vis Turkey and with Turkish experiences of eradication and controlled reintroduction as matters of either foreign relations or populist politics, residents of poppy-producing villages rarely appeared as anything other than part of the scenery (Spain  ; Altindal  ; Erhan  ; Uslu  ). Moreover, not only did most histories omit the farmers' voices, they also neglected traditional social and environmental relationships.

As part of a wider research project that examines critically broader ecologies and geopolitics of opium in Turkey, past and present, in this article I am concerned with the actual local poppy ecologies targeted in the first clash of America's 'war on drugs.' I utilize oral history as a primary source to explore these ecologies from parts of rural Turkey prior to the implementation of anti-narcotics legislation. Drawing on narrative accounts from now-retired farmers, I reconstruct and situate their past livelihoods during cultivation, elementary processing, and marketing and con-

* I am indebted to the forty retired poppy farmers who provided me with the wealth of their experiences and memories and to my research assistants, Yüksel, Zuhal, and Augie. My research was supported by the Center for the Advanced Study of International Development, the Center for Gender in a Global Context, and Muslim Studies, all at Michigan State University. Additionally, though not employed directly in the research for this article, it was also informed by opportunities to review archival and document collections pertaining to the period of eradication held in the Washington, D.C. area that were made possible by a short-term fellowship administered by the Kennan Institute of the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in the summer of  .  I  also  benefited from the editorial advice of the anonymous reviewers of my manuscript and Craig Colten.

/ornament11 Dr. Evered is  an  assistant  professor of geography at Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan - ;  [ktevered@msu.edu].

F .  Poppy fields in May, when traditional harvests began in Turkey. (Photograph by the author, May  )

<!-- image -->

sumption. In doing so, my study renders valuable information regarding ethnoand environmental histories from a people of both a class and a region that existing histories otherwise overlooked in these terms and provides a basis for better understanding the profound impacts of the state's subsequent policies of eradication in particular, and modernization more generally. In each regard, my research informs the conduct and challenges of both cultivation and eradication as seen elsewhere in the world today, such as locations in India, where it is legal but still practiced in a traditional fashion, and in Afghanistan, where it is decidedly illegal and implicated in financing an ongoing insurgency.

This examination of the crop and the degrees to which it is culturally, ecologically, and economically embedded in rural communities and landscapes is a crucial first step in dealing with the 'poppy question' from alternative academic perspectives and in adopting pragmatic policy approaches. On a matter still active in particular populations' collective memories, this work also informs existing archival and secondary sources through its integration of recollections and perceptions on issues ranging from the ecological to the geopolitical from a region of past eradication and successful reintroduction (Figure  ).

Research Approach, Methods, Circumstances, and Ethics

This article is informed by approaches in cultural and political ecology. Although certain cultural ecology scholarship inclined strongly toward classification and 'objective'  explanation, other traditions incorporated greater tendencies toward hu-

manism in dealing with past people-environment relationships, the associated production of cultural landscapes, and constructions of environmental ideas and perceptions (Sauer  ,  ; Netting  ,  ; Denevan  ). This fieldwork-driven approach in cultural ecology emphasized strongly attempts to learn from rural  and often indigenous  societies, ideally through their own languages and experiences. My study is consistent with priorities established by this latter tradition of cultural ecology.

To a greater degree, I emphasize current trends within political ecology that prioritize alternative narratives and meaning as a way to address constructively the politicized nature of rural livelihoods (Goodman, Boykoff, and Evered  ).  Indeed, for almost a decade, in particular studies focused on livelihoods, a decided tendency exists that encourages revisiting the 'ethnographic' to assess modernization (Bebbington  ; McSweeney  ; Escobar  ). Distinct from ethnography, oral history as a research practice is a useful method for reconstructing past ecologies as practiced and politicized and for analyzing how collective experiences and memories continue to be significant (Ricoeur  - ,  ; Özyürek  ).

Characterized as 'grassroots history' or 'history from below,' oral history offers an avenue for recovering unofficial narratives, popular experiences, and voices from disenfranchised populations (Hobsbawm  ).  It  thus  provides opportunities to rectify the problem of 'nobody listening to a poor man'  especially in his (or her) own words  to paraphrase Timothy Mitchell (  ,  - ). Moreover, collecting and analyzing oral history together render valuable means of reconstructing firsthand details of past nature-society relationships and their political ramifications. Derided as 'ethnographic,' 'quaint,' or 'anecdotal at best' by critics who seek purely quantifiable data, oral histories actually allow voices to emerge in ways that transcend questionnaires that otherwise impose reductionist responses. They thus function as a powerful augmentation  and corrective  to quantitative and document-based approaches that purport to address conditions of otherwise voiceless populations. The Africanist historian Jan V ansina, a major oral history pioneer, recorded one informant's words in the Congo: 'We too know the past, because we carry our newspapers in our heads' (  ,  ).  In  this  sense  of  uncovering 'carried' histories, and as elaborated upon in this article concerning memories of past ecologies and nature-society relations, one might well contend that for certain topics and research questions the 'anecdotal' is best.

I draw upon narratives by forty now-retired poppy farmers who reside in towns and villages of Turkey's overlapping Aegean, Afyon, and lakes regions. I collected these histories over a four-week period of research during the summer of  . Individual-based interviews ranged from twenty-five minutes to half a day, or about four to five hours, not counting time spent engaging in common introductions and discussion and sometimes sharing tea or a meal. All of these interviews were conducted in Turkish. One of the two female college students who worked as my research assistants accompanied me to many interviews, especially when I interviewed women. And as interviews turned to the political dimensions of the respondents'

experiences with the  s policy of eradication, I sometimes excused myself from the room and encouraged my research assistants to continue the conversation without me. Although informants had strong feelings about the United States' role in the poppy ban, some clearly feared offending me because I am a U.S. citizen  and I especially wanted to learn about their views.

I recorded and later transcribed interviews prior to synthesizing and analyzing them. Twenty informants were men; twenty were women. Their ages ranged from fifty-five to eighty-six, with a median age of seventy-six; all cultivated poppies prior to the  s ban and following reintroduction; and many had adult children and other family members who were still poppy farmers.

In dealing with circumstances and memories from at least three decades ago, I posed open-ended questions in order to avoid suggesting responses as much as possible. Initially, I asked informants about when people first farmed poppies in the region, their earliest recollections of poppy farming, and so forth. I encouraged them to address comfortably and plainly broad themes that included their memories and knowledge of the communities and land, aspects of the crop, commodities harvested, household and wider economies, and the ban in terms of implementation, personal experiences, its subsequent reversal, and associated politics. In concluding, I encouraged them to tell me anything that they thought other people, either in Turkey or the United States, should know about them and their communities,  their  livelihoods,  and their experiences. The interviewees often urged me to share more widely their anxieties regarding changes affecting their communities, state administration of the poppy and other crops, and questions that they have concerning the state, the European Union, and the future of farming. In turn, they sometimes asked questions about these matters or about my own interests, profession, or family.

Based on prior research in the region with people of this age group, the collection of individual oral histories was most appropriate  and most welcomed. In past survey work  sometimes involving several hundred completed surveys  the elderly were those most likely to stop midway through an interview, often indicating that they were tired or had other obligations. Additionally, in focus groups, many interviewees were decidedly inclined to defer to others according to gender, age, income, and other factors. For example, the women commonly deferred to husbands, allowing them to answer and then simply agreeing; the elderly tended to defer to their grown children if they had become heads of household; and grown children, ranging in age from eighteen to their early  s, deferred to their parents if they were still living at home. I especially sought to include elderly women's voices, for they had some of the closest relationships with the crops and because of their unique roles in their households and communities.

Not unlike questionnaire-based methods, my approach has limitations. As with informants' survey responses, narratives may reflect what informants assume a researcher wants to hear or how they feel they should respond. Another limitation derives from information memorized and retold. Although recollections of emo-

tional reactions to the eradication of poppy cultivation may endure vividly, memories of the seemingly mundane  how crops were planted, harvested, or marketed, for example  may be fragmentary or presented in ways connected only to present circumstances or events due to perceived contrasts. These factors create particular challenges for the researcher as narratives are retold. In synthesizing and ordering information, I nonetheless found the expression of many informants' recollections to be incomplete without references, especially as comparisons and contrasts, to present phenomena and situations. To avoid loss of information, I include these juxtapositions, despite the fact that this frustrates the convenience and clarity of a purely linear narrative.

In presenting situational research, 'locating' those involved in the process is important. My work in these communities began more than ten years ago with studies on wetlands and associated agrofood systems. I later focused on the question of poppies not so much due to the degrees to which the crop is politicized (and criminalized) on global scales but because of how it is integrated thoroughly and inextricably into local farming and food systems. My past work in these communities (and the fact that I have Turkish relatives, though none in this area) enabled a relaxation of common disinclinations to talk with an outsider about the seasonally ubiquitous poppy fields. I also benefited from the aid of research assistants: two university students who are daughters of local poppy farmers. Their vital contributions to this study enabled interviews with community women.

As with any fieldwork method, questions of ethics arise with oral history. I intentionally omit the names of specific locations and substitute randomly first names that are common in the region for those of actual informants. The populations were and are economically and politically marginal and vulnerable, and ethics preclude rendering information for third parties. When American journalists wrote the highly informative exposé The Heroin Trail ( Newsday staff  and  editors  ), they earned a Pulitzer Prize for public-service journalism. Some critics contend, however, that such reporting also resulted in threats and intimidation of local peoples. Poppy farmers still feel vulnerable, due to contemporary state controls over licenses to cultivate, and their insecurity is heightened by increasingly neoliberal policies that entail the removal of subsidies and rural services.

## Modernization and Poppy-Growing Villages

In the development of a literature on Turkish villages and agriculture, questions of modernization, livelihoods, and gender constitute predominant themes (Kolars  ; Hinderink and Kiray  ; Benedict  ; Benedict, Tümertekin, and Mansur  ; Delaney  ; Lowry  ; Stirling  ). From this tradition, Daniel Lerner's chapter on 'The Grocer and the Chief' stands out as a commonly referenced example of earlier works on modernization (  ,  - ). In his oft-cited parable of the village of Balgat, an eventual suburb of Ankara, Lerner interviewed residents on two occasions over four years. Over time, the wider  and modern  society that the republic aspired to become absorbed the village socioeconomically, po-

litically, and spatially. Most villagers, Lerner wrote, eventually embraced this transformation as they transitioned from farming to wage labor and consumerism and conveyed optimism.

Though postponed for thirty years since the republic's foundation in the  s, the integration of Balgat into the modern nation-state during the  s took place decades ahead of most rural communities if we look beyond just conscription and primary education. Conveying this protracted modernization of the rural, one historian observed, 'If we take something like electrification as a measure of modernization, we note that as late as  the total number of villages that had been linked up to the electric grid was ten, or  .  per cent of Turkey's  ,  villages!' (Zürcher  ,  ). Profoundly consistent with critiques of utopian social engineering and high-modernist ideologies (Scott  ), critical scholarship on the Kemalist nationstate  today confronts this question of an ambiguous modernity (Bozdogan and Kasaba  ).

Amid deferred development, many poppy-growing communities of the early  s thus exhibited traditional economies and ecologies and rather distant relationships with the state. Early ethnographies, travel accounts, and journalistic surveys often emphasized 'long-suffering' or otherwise desperate circumstances ( Newsday staff and editors  ,  ).  In  contrast,  no  informants for this study described their lives in such bleak terms. Rather, they spoke of surmountable challenges: hard work, little pay, few opportunities, and adverse class distinctions within village relations as perceived and/or manifest from slight but appreciable differences in households' relative access to land and water rights, livestock, and/or family labor. Local politics also sometimes played a role, as did interfamily relationships.

Prior to the eradication of poppy cultivation, apart from participation in elections, the impacts of extralocal politics were generally slight on and peripheral to informants' lives In my respondents' first significant encounter with the wider world  apart from the presence of two former guest workers  the United States seemed to pressure their own state to indict their entire ecologies, economies, and communities as backward and criminal. This experience thus gave way to villagers' first major recollections of how their own lives and livelihoods could be influenced by external powers, such as the United States or the European Union.

## Land and Cultivation

Characterized as a set of regions of limited agricultural potential, interior portions of Turkey's Aegean, Mediterranean, Afyon, and lakes regions constitute Anatolia's wider hearth of poppy cultivation, past and present (Erinç and Tunçdilek  ). Figure  indicates both this hearth and a north-central secondary area of production. Predating the eleventh-century arrival of Turkic peoples, the poppy itself was domesticated in the Eastern Mediterranean region during or prior to the fourth millennium b.c.e. (Merlin  ; Kapoor  ;  Booth  ). Thriving in otherwise marginal soils and requiring minimal water, it is ideally suited for southwestern Turkey and, to the area's inhabitants, seems to be an inseparable part of the land-

F .  Turkey permits poppy cultivation in just fourteen provinces. In those provinces the total areas sown ranged from  to  ,  hectares in  ,  with  the  highest levels of cultivation in the crop's traditional hearth. Source of data: T.  C.  Basbakanlik  .  (Cartography by Sarah AcMoody, Department of Geography, Michigan State University)

<!-- image -->

scape. When I asked local farmers if they knew when people first cultivated poppies in the area, one retiree replied simply, 'We've always had poppies/opium here.'

Cultivation of poppies in Anatolia on established fields was not itself an inherently labor-intensive activity, unlike farming in more arid regions where consistent provision of water is essential (Hobbs  ).  In contrast, the customary means of opiate collection from the poppies was extremely labor intensive. Sixty-seven-yearold Sükran noted this limitation as she described past freedoms to plant, 'No permission slips or licenses were required; we just planted as much as we wanted  and could harvest.' Indeed, intensive labor demand for harvesting was the key factor that constrained traditional scales of production. According to more general studies of Turkish opium, farmers often limited themselves to household scales and planted only about four to five fields, each measuring approximately one-tenth of a hectare (Erhan  ); all of my exchanges with informants confirmed this generalization.

Past-present contrasts often pertained to land tenure. Since controlled reintroduction, government licensing has necessitated actual ownership as a precondition for acquisition of a permit. Previously, however, some farmers owned only a few fields, and some owned none. Ahmed, a retiree from farming and driving trucks, revealed the precarious nature of sharecropping. Owning no property, he first farmed others' fields. Initially inexperienced, Ahmed entered unwisely into arrangements that involved fixed amounts of opium prior even to sowing the fields. These set terms reflected, at best, highly optimistic forecasts of what certain fields might yield

under optimal conditions. Almost in debt after his first experiences, Ahmed later planted only those fields owned by people willing to involve themselves in postharvest sales with prearranged percentage-based divisions of profits.

Addressing matters of landownership, I asked informants if they had experienced or remembered stories of agrarian reform. Most had no recollection  usually indicating that agrarian reform was something experienced in other regions  but a few farmers in one village remembered reforms from earlier years of the republic. As Eflatun Bey, in his eighties, recalled:

The land reforms were good. They required every farm to have road access. This cut down on the size of some farms [due to additional pathways to roads] but also eliminated disputes and arguments over access through peoples' farms. . . . [The state] also combined many small patches of land into whole [more farmable] fields. Though the reforms could also be bad; sometimes farmers got distant or poor fields. . . . Around  [likely referring to the  law No.  Providing Land to Farmers], the state bought some area lands. These were rented to villagers for a time, but at some point the lands were given to migrants [who moved] to the area.

Less sanguine about past reforms, and reflecting class distinctions, a slightly younger neighbor stated, 'The land reforms only benefited the rich. They got the best lands, and the worst were given to the poor.'

Today, state officials working for the Turkish state's grain board, the tmo , dictates this fundamental determination of when a farmer should plant and effectively enforces these decisions through the release of sanctioned seed varieties on specific dates. Previously, however, farmers decided on planting dates and seed varieties. On this transition, Sükran remarked, 'We lost flexibility in planting when we knew it was right/appropriate to do so, and now the state delivers the seeds, but it's sometimes too late.'

Plowing and fertilizing fields in the past could be more laborious. In her eighties, Zeynep related, 'Nowadays it's easier. Y ou have tractors and don't need oxen or cows to plow, and it's so much easier to harvest. Though in the past you could grow limitless amounts . . . [limited just by how much you could harvest].' Like today, villagers' dairy cattle  most households today own three to seven cows  provided the sole fertilizer. Huriye, a widow in her late sixties who still helps her children and grandchildren with some farm chores, observed, 'In the past we used manure, but today some people use chemicals. Many who use chemical fertilizers use too much, however, and this just 'burns' the crop.' After witnessing several seasons of planting, however, I have yet to observe any examples of people using chemical fertilizers. Most current farmers indicate that they are not as concerned with the negative impacts of fertilizers as they are discouraged by their high cost. Some conveyed a lack of confidence in the expertise of the state officials who encourage routinely fertilizer adoption. Others speculated that they may not need fertilizers as much today because of the state requirements. In its management of how poppies are grown, harvested, and sold, the tmo commonly requires two seasons for fallow or

sowing other crops  usually fodder  before allowing farmers to resow their fields with poppies.

Although the poppy's capacity to thrive with little water is one of its greatest virtues, application of water during late-summer planting can be crucial. Most farmers, past and present, concede that watering the crop at least once is essential, but some indicate that subsequent watering is critical, too, depending on the situation of the field and on climatic conditions. Under some circumstances, watering served another purpose: Huriye related, '[We] watered immediately; otherwise ants came to eat the seeds.'

Access to water was once a source of discontent and tension in some, though not in all, villages. Concerning past water rights and relations, seventy-five-year-old Fatma noted, 'The village water guard told us how much we could have and how to share it.' Under traditional irrigation management, all emphasized their payments for water  with appreciable discontent on the part of some regarding preferential access. Although at times past managers withheld water  usually for longer than one week  due to conditions of drought, some respondents indicated that 'the rich' always received water for their fields, nonetheless.

Apart from drought and pests, other risks threatened freshly sown poppy seeds. Frost was the overriding concern, and it still is a significant problem. To safeguard against frost, the farmers applied manure, mostly to insulate their plants. Additionally,  most respondents stated that feral pigs were troublesome but that they had posed a lesser threat in the past. Depending on field location, swine are one of the biggest risks for today's poppy farmers, because the wild pigs readily consume plants just prior to harvest.

As inferred, poppy cultivation was strictly a matter of household labor in most instances in rural Turkey, involving men, women, and children. Although informants associated some duties  such as using animals for plowing  mostly with men, all family members generally shared other duties related to the initial stages of production. In latter phases involving harvesting, processing, and marketing, divisions of work along gendered lines were more appreciable.

## Harvesting and Processing

In accounts of traditional harvesting and extraction, my informants also emphasized contrasts and continuities. One continuity involves the household's enduring role as the primary unit of production. Past farmers had a decided preference for avoiding going beyond the family for labor, despite the facts that hired labor was available cheaply and that labor itself was the major factor limiting profits under traditional methods of harvesting. As Sükran commented, concerning family and village practices, 'We always avoided hiring [manual] laborers [to help at harvest time].' Most farmers told me that they did not trust hired workers to harvest effectively or, more commonly, honestly.

High labor demand was attributable to a number of factors. First, traditional harvesting presented a relatively short window, generally commencing in mid-to-late

F .  Implements employed in extracting opiates from poppy capsules. Growers first lanced capsules with a small, sharp blade ( left )  and then, usually the next day, used a scraper ( center )  to remove the drying milk/gum from the capsules and place it into a wooden bowl ( right ). (Photograph by the author, summer  )

<!-- image -->

May and concluding by mid-to-late-June. Second, within this five-to-six-week window, farmers lanced and 'milked' capsules several times. Third, each day following the cutting, they returned to collect the opiate-containing 'milk' as it dried into a gumlike state that they scraped from the capsule. Fourth, lancing and scraping capsules required particular attention; with care, capsules could sustain additional milking. Fifth, daily walks to, from, and between the fields consumed considerable time as families commonly owned multiple fields in several locations, most well away from their home. Harvests were thus quite intensive. As seventy-one-year-old Ayse recalled from her youth; 'In the past, we stood all day to milk the plants  until our legs ached.'

Apart from complex and seasonal demands for household labor, traditional extraction and harvesting were simple and relatively uncomplicated. Recounting extraction practices, farmers described established methods and tools  techniques and implements not at all dissimilar from those found in Afghanistan today. When asked, a few located these in toolboxes or barns; items identical to those documented previously by the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime in its early survey of Turkish opium production ( unodc  ).

In their accounts of traditional extraction, the farmers described how they used a small blade to slice into the ripe poppy capsule in order to release the sap. After milking the capsule they would wait for a day or so for the milk to dry to a gum.

They would then use a scraper to carefully remove the drying gum from the capsule. The gum was collected in wooden bowl, then put into an 'opium milk bag' (Figure  ).

Without exception, informants indicated that this one-to-two-month period of milking the poppies involved strenuous work. Women and children handled most households' extraction, but in many other cases, the task fell to all family members. In all cases, it was a serious time and yielded one of the few opportunities for most villagers to earn cash. In this respect, they grew as much as they possibly could harvest. Sixty-seven-year-old Makbule recalled from her childhood and later, 'Because we could only milk at certain times, it [our limit on growing poppies] was all based on [our family's availability of] labor.'

Retirees commonly distinguished this labor-based limitation on planting from today's harvesting practices. Since the controlled reintroduction of the mid- s farmers simply pull capsules from the stalks of the dried plants (usually in early or mid-July). A family can clear a field  on average, approximately one-tenth of a hectare, as in the past  in this manner in under two hours, followed by the smashing of dried capsules to remove seeds for home consumption and some marketing. Farmers deliver capsule remains to state offices for sale. In turn, the state's Afyon-based factory relies on these deliveries in processing medical morphine for national and international sale.

Ayse contrasted today's work with past experiences: 'When we had to milk the crop, we only could farm two or three fields. Now that we don't [need to milk the crop to harvest it], you can have up to eight or ten [if you get permission from the state]. ' Another respondent indicated that today's method affords greater time for other farm work or for leisure; 'Growing it is much easier now that we don't have to milk [the crop]. We have much more time [for other things]. . . . After the ban came [and the reintroduction], it was no longer necessary to milk the crop. Then everyone wanted to begin planting the crop because it was easier to harvest.'

Previously, harvest time was also a period of risk. Seventy-year old Ömer explained, 'You could only cut the poppy [capsule] at the right time; otherwise the seeds would be ruined.' Other retirees indicated that premature milking resulted in the seeds either not fully developing or simply flowing out with the milk itself. Rain during harvests also could be catastrophic if it fell between the initial lancing and the subsequent milk/gum collecting; product and profits could wash away. At best, the quality simply diminished with rain but was not utterly lost, allowing for lesser margins of profitability.

In preparation for sale, farmers worked the gum into balls  sometimes with particular additives. Ayse recalled, 'We would knead the gum, roll it into balls, and would mix it with eggs and then let it dry for ten to fifteen days.' Others remembered spitting into it, as an alternative to mixing in raw eggs. In all instances, informants discussed adding eggs or saliva to inhibit the growth of mold as the balls of gum dried. Describing collecting and rudimentary processing, Ömer recalled product grades in terms of quality and value:

We would cut one day, gather the next day into bowls, and then we would knead the gum into balls. We would wrap the balls in the poppies' leaves. The price was based on color; it was higher if the color was a deep yellow  like a camel's piss, but it was lower if the color was black because it was the poorest quality. Just like the yellow balls, the white, thick-skinned capsules were the highest quality.

Collecting the remaining capsules was also critical. Ayse described this aspect of harvesting as well: 'When we couldn't milk [the poppy capsule] any longer [and after it dried], we'd smash it with our feet or in other ways and use a sifter for the seeds. Now there's a machine for doing this in our village.' Farmers retained seeds for later planting and for many other uses.

## Past Economies and Traditions in Marketing

Summarizing the poppy's extent throughout most of the nineteenth-century Ottoman economy, one historian wrote that 'opium touched everyone' (Poroy  ,  ). Indeed, despite the fact that harvests occurred in small Anatolian villages, Turkish, Armenian, Greek, Jewish, and other Ottoman and foreign communities all engaged in various processing and marketing activities beyond local scales of cultivation. Although lands sown with poppies were few in comparison with areas in which other crops were produced, opium was among the empire's more lucrative commodities (Issawi  ,  - ; Schmidt  ). It was also commanded the highest prices (Evered  a,  ). With its profitability and the growing Asian demand, the empire sought to increase controls over buying and taxing opium through state-run monopsonies, but these measures were unsuccessful amid imperial decline (Poroy  ).

Likewise, the nascent and financially stressed republican state had little motivation to confront trafficking. Indeed, in reviewing state narcotics legislation from  , degrees to which it moved to control drugs largely involved matters of public safety, supply, and taxation. In League of Nations meetings during the  s  and  s, Turkey's representatives provided emphatic testimony indicating the republic's dependence on opium-export revenues ( ln  ,  - ). By the late  s and early  s the republic estimated that as many as  .  million citizens relied on poppybased incomes and that eradication cost the nation the equivalent of u.s .  million per year during the  s (Republic of Turkey  ,  ,  ).

Opiate production before and after eradication are not readily comparable in terms of opiate produced, due both to preeradication informal/illicit trade and to differences in data recorded in which weight of opium gum was calculated before the ban and capsule weight was calculated after it, but statistics on areas planted in the  s and  s show how the ban affected people and communities (Table I). Clearly the scale of production began to decrease beyond usual levels of fluctuation as early as  ,  following the Turkish state's  ratification  of  the  U.N.  Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs ( unincb  ).

Throughout the interviews, retirees noted that the poppy was the foremost, if not the only, cash crop during their lifetimes. Claiming that 'everything else' was both produced and consumed locally, they further emphasized its importance. In

this regard, they stressed the poppy's past role as the main link between their villages and the wider world. Several also spoke of their villages in the days of their childhoods or their fathers' and grandfathers' lifetimes, when men loaded opium onto camels  today entirely absent  bound for provincial centers. Such circuits of trade, they conveyed, were as timeless as the poppy itself, at least until the early-tomid-twentieth century.

Table I  Opium Poppy Cultivation in Turkey, 1960-1979

|   year |   area sown ( in hectares ) |   year |   area sown ( in hectares ) |
|--------|-----------------------------|--------|-----------------------------|
|   1960 |                      42,000 |   1970 |                      10,028 |
|   1961 |                      38,700 |   1971 |                      13,374 |
|   1962 |                      36,000 |   1972 |                       6,383 |
|   1963 |                      38,000 |   1973 |                           0 |
|   1964 |                      28,000 |   1974 |                           0 |
|   1965 |                      22,300 |   1975 |                       8,570 |
|   1966 |                      24,000 |   1976 |                      22,077 |
|   1967 |                      20,600 |   1977 |                      72,072 |
|   1968 |                      13,000 |   1978 |                      50,647 |
|   1969 |                      16,089 |   1979 |                      17,868 |

Source:

T. C. Basbakanlik  ,  - ,  -  .

Although men and women both cultivated and sometimes harvested and processed together, men involved themselves far more in farm  though not necessarily household fi nancial management and marketing. Prior to the ban, two options for sales existed. First, farmers could sell to tmo officials, this opium trade leading to processing into, and the internationally legal sales of, medical morphine. Indeed, following eradication, diminished supplies strained international pharmaceutical markets; a situation from which new Australian growers sought to profit (Williams  ). Sometimes the state also purchased seeds for crop research. Sixty-eight-yearold Yunus recalled, 'One year [ca. the  s or  s] the government asked us to sell everything [to the tmo ]. I think they wanted extra seeds or more varieties.' In her seventies, Türkan remembered similar proposals: 'The state wanted to buy everything in the capsules to make seeds from them, but they never did.'

Indeed, the state often diminished incentives to sell to its own agencies through inconsistency and lower prices. Perhaps the greatest incentive to sell to the state involved occasional access to advance credit. However, such sales necessitated travel into sometimes distant provincial centers where villagers could wait entire days before seeing state purchasing agents. The informants' frustration was further substantiated by one writer's  June  critique of the early republic's transactions. Ali Tüzel indicated that farmers had ready choices in selling, but in state sales the tmo often paid approximately  percent less than did independent buyers. Also reflecting the lack of easy transportation in the  s, he wrote that the trips were hardships for the farmers, who both lost time in their fields and incurred expenses. He

therefore put forward suggestions to incentivize state purchases (Tüzel  ;  see also Karpat  ,  ; Karaömerlioglu  ).

As a second option, villagers could sell to individuals. From these sales, smugglers transported the majority of the product into either Iran or Europe. In Iran, opium underwent minimal further processing, and traffickers sold it raw to a large market of opium smokers. In Europe, processing laboratories refined it into heroin and marketed it there or in the United States. Unlike stories of earlier generations loading camels for sales in distant cities, later roads and vehicles enabled buyers to visit villagers throughout the  s,  s, and early  s. Türkan stated, 'Buyers came regularly to the village, then my husband sold [to them].'

No laws or sanctions appreciably inhibited these 'illegal' or 'unlicensed' purchasers' activities prior to the early- s, and dealers generally received light sentences, in contrast with later verdicts during the universal ban on production and sales. Retirees recalled buyers' willingness to journey to their villages  sometimes traveling distances spanning several hours by road. In such accounts, however, villagers commonly included parenthetical asides indicating that none of these dealers came from the informants' own communities: 'Illegal dealers  none from our village  sometimes came here. There was one from Isparta. . . . He'd come at night to collect the gum and leave. He was rumored to be an illegal dealer.' Hatice also recalled, 'Merchants once came from as far off as Usak [about four hours by road] to buy from the poppy farmers. We sold it to the person offering the highest price.' Indeed, informants sometimes expressed genuine affection for the dealers. As one elderly woman recalled, 'Nobody ever tried to use it [here] illegally. But, God bless his soul, there was a man called 'Çiçek Mehmet' [Mehmet the Flower]. He always bought it here and sold it in Afyon, Burdur, or Denizli. We sold it to him because he always had cash. The state usually paid late, but he didn't.'

Illegality thus arose in discussions of how people coped with the ban  and, in most instances, with the loss of their sole source of income. In such narratives, farmers revealed hardships incurred and how some sales from previously planted and harvested crops continued. Most said that state sentences for disobeying the cultivation ban or for engaging in illegal sales tended to amount to ten years of imprisonment, but some continued to sell their remaining stocks due to the economic quandary in which they found themselves. Once discussion of the years of the ban arose, villagers' references to experiences of 'suffering'  references they otherwise avoided  were not uncommon.

Prior to eradication, villagers considered cultivating poppies because of the economic relief the crop offered. The role of the poppy today as a cash crop, albeit through its sale only to the state, continues to compel many to grow it. Asked if she wanted her descendants to cultivate poppies, one grandmother replied positively, 'Of course. They'll always have money in hand.' Phrased alternatively  and speaking to the profound role of the poppy beyond its provision of opiates for sale, past and present, another retiree noted, 'We were getting both money and food.'

## Traditions in Crop Use and Consumption

For people at local scales in many regions of cultivation, the eradication question centers first and last on the threat to eliminate a lucrative source of revenue. In Anatolia, however, crop eradication was complicated by history and by the many ways in which villagers utilized the plant and its produce for purposes transcending a cash income. Although men often took charge of marketing, women figured centrally in handling the many local uses of the crop. These uses included applications both medicinal and culinary, and farmers found other functions for the plant over time, as well.

Perhaps the most important alternative use involved the production of poppyseed oil. Given the fact that many interior Anatolian communities lacked olive trees for oil, poppy-seed oil was crucial. As Hatice indicated, 'There was no other oil but butter.' The oil also had a second use: as a source of income. Zehra recalled, 'In the past [when I was a child] we did not sell it. We produced enough of the oil for the family, but we began to sell it to the merchants. . . . What we wouldn't consume [of the seeds and oil], we sold.' In addition, interviewees regarded the oil itself as having curative properties. Informants commonly mentioned its utility in managing aches and rheumatism, promoting good circulation and a healthy heart, soothing wounds and scrapes, and dealing with animals' mange.

Women commonly utilized poppy seeds in baking and cooking, and many still process them into a paste that tastes, and is consumed, like organic peanut butter. Villagers also commonly added such pastes to local varieties of halvah, and many eat it with a traditional fruit preservative. Although I never witnessed it, some informants spoke of consuming the plant's leaves in salads in the spring, most often as something of a celebratory meal that coincided with the arrival of the season. Finally, farmers cleared dried plant stalks from the fields after harvests for use as fuel in cooking and home stoves and for construction projects. The stalks were essential in local brick making and as roof thatch for homes and barns.

Related to its narcotic uses, the poppy also had traditional therapeutic functions. Often mentioned as an additive for teas, villagers sometimes used the opiates to treat toothaches, headaches, and other problems of soreness or discomfort. Likewise, many women commented on its utility in soothing teething pains of infants. Others, however, stated that such uses were improper and/or prohibited in their households. Consumption simply as a narcotic, however, was a practice that informants universally denied. Some indicated that they heard stories of people from 'other villages' falling prey to the drug during their lifetimes, but they also noted that such occurrences were rare. Among sanctions for inappropriate use or addiction, a few retirees specified instances of expulsion from family and village. When I inquired about this potential problem, respondents also integrated matters of religion and morality to explain the absence of narcotics abuse in their own communities, noting that it is something that only immoral, urban, or 'bad people' engaged in or that 'Muslims don't take drugs.'

## Enduring Themes, Changing Relationships

As early as  , when the state further restricted areas of licit cultivation in accord with U.S. demands, many poppy-growing communities first experienced the authority  though not necessarily the benefits  of the modern republic. Throughout their collected accounts, informants interpreted this and subsequent events leading to eradication as a consequence of the breakdown of democracy within their own country and of the United States' intractable demands to criminalize the plant. As I have shown in this article, however, the poppy as crop, as commodity, and as food source was inextricably embedded in particular Anatolian landscapes, cultures, economies, and communities. Villagers viewed the then military-led Turkish state and the United States as culpable for having banned their entire way of life by prohibiting poppy cultivation. Given the relative absence  and probable denial  of addiction problems in Turkey, villagers continue to grapple with understanding why the United States seemed to target their villages in confronting its own narcotics predicament.

Though profound at the time  and still vexing  the villagers' eradication-related hardships were short-lived. Exasperated in the early  s with discussions of unpalatable crop and commodity substitutions  with sunflowers and sunflowerseed oil, for example  and delays in compensation, many respondents indicated that most farmers eventually received adequate remuneration. Some even stated that particular farmers profited, by village standards, because they had increased their scales of cultivation and harvesting when the state established its estimates for individuals' rates of compensation. Other ramifications of eradication, however, endure as legacies in associated ecologies, communities, and society-state relationships.

Although people still grow poppies on comparable scales in many of the region's communities, the dynamics and motivations differ. Once motivated by informal market and state prices  and limited only by household labor resources  today poppy farmers are attracted to the crop not only because of its anticipated profits from the state and commercial and household uses for its seeds but also because of lesser labor demands under current harvesting practices. Viewed previously as a sometimes problematic, distant, and lower-paying buyer, through eradication and reintroduction the state reemerged as an omnipotent authority in rural poppyfarming communities. Not only enforcing its monopsony over capsule/opiate procurement, the state also dictates qualifications of both farmers and fields, stipulates the timing of cultivation, and controls the very seeds to be planted. The Turkish state also exerts this biopolitical authority over other commodities, though under different justifications and to lesser degrees (Alexander  ).

Under today's regimes of control, we might regard my informants as members of Turkey's last generation of free-farming poppy growers. Indeed, although government, farmers, and scholars refer to controls over poppies, and other crops, in terms of 'licensing,' state-dictated practices of licensing, planting, and marketing

reduce the work of agriculture to little more than contract farming (Little and Watts  ;  Grossman  ;  Striffler  ).  From its position of omnipotent authority, both political and socioeconomic, the state may enjoy widespread popular support when it can afford to endorse farmers  as perceived when poppy cultivation was reinstated in  . T oday, however, in the course of structural adjustments and austerity measures, farmers' support of the state can be erratic, for they resist neoliberal policies dictated by the government, the International Monetary fund, and the European Union (Evered  b). Viewed from this broader perspective, less optimism exists among informants like the grandmother who hoped that her descendants would be poppy farmers because they would 'always have money in hand.' In facing this future, the challenges faced prior to eradication seem less insurmountable.

To be sure, the Turkish example provides us today with a case for effective eradication of illicit crop cultivation, albeit within the context of a strong or authoritarian state. However, this case also renders a cautionary tale with respect to how deeply such policies of eradication and control can have cultural, ecological, and political impacts on a people and a nation. Promotion of such policies from abroad cannot help but result in increasing anti-American sentiment as new communities feel the effects of America's ongoing war on drugs.

## References

- Alexander, C.  . Personal States: Making Connections between People and Bureaucracy in Turkey . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Altindal, A.  . Hashas ve Emperyalizm (Poppies and Imperialism). Istanbul: HAVASS.
- Bebbington, A.  . Reencountering Development: Livelihood Transitions and Place Transformations in the Andes. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Benedict, P.  . Ula: An Anatolian Town . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
- Benedict, P ., E. Tümertekin, and F. Mansur, eds.  . Turkey: Geographic and Social Perspectives . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.
- Booth, M.  . Opium: A History . New York: St. Martin's Press.
- Bozdogan, S., and R. Kasaba, eds.  . Rethinking Modernity and National Identity in Turkey . Seattle: University of Washington Press.
- Delaney, C.  . The Seed and the Soil: Gender and Cosmology in Turkish Village Society .  Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Denevan, W. M.  . The Pristine Myth: The Landscape of the Americas in  . Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Erhan, Ç.  . Beyaz Savas: Türk-Amer ikan Iliskilerinde Afyon Sorunu (White War: The Opium Problem in Turkish-American Relations). Ankara: Bilgi Yayinevi.
- Erinç, S., and N. Tunçdilek.  . The Agricultural Regions of Turkey. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .
- Escobar, A.  . Territories of Difference: Place, Movements, Life, Redes . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
- Evered, K. T.  a. Poppy Ecologies and Security in Eurasia: Lessons from Turkey's Past and Present. In Environmental Problems of Central Asia and their Economic, Social, and Security Impacts, edited by J. Qi and K. T. Evered,  - . Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
- ---.  b. Shifting Governmentalities and the Turkish Farmer: Rural Perspectives on Structural Reforms and the European Union. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Political Geography Specialty Group, Worcester, Mass.
- Goodman, M. K., M. T. Boykoff, and K. T. Evered, eds.  . Contentious Geographies: Environmental Knowledge, Meaning, Scale . Aldershot, England: Ashgate.
- Grossman, L. S.  . The Political Ecology of Bananas: Contract Farming, Peasants, and Agrarian Change in the Eastern Caribbean . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

- Hinderink, J., and M. B. Kiray.  . Social Stratification as an Obstacle to Development: A Study of Four Turkish Villages . New York: Praeger.
- Hobbs, J. J.  . Troubling Fields: The Opium Poppy in Egypt. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .

Hobsbawm, E. J.



.

History from Below



Some Reflections. In

Protest and Popular Ideology in Honour of George Rude,

Blackwell.

- Issawi, C.  . The Economic History of Turkey,  - . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Kapoor, L. D.  . Opium Poppy: Botany, Chemistry, and Pharmacology .  Binghamton, N.Y.: Food Products Press.
- Karaömerlioglu, M. A.  . The People's Houses and the Cult of the Peasant in Turkey. Middle Eastern Studies  (  ):  - .
- Karpat, K. H.  . The People's Houses in Turkey: Establishment and Growth. Middle East Journal  (  &amp;  ):  - .
- ---.  . The Impact of People's Houses on the Development of Communication in Turkey:  - . Die Welt des Islams  (  - ):  - .
- Kolars, J. F.  . Tradition, Season, and Change in a Turkish Village . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Lerner, D.  . The Passing of Traditional Society: Modernizing the Middle East .  Glencoe, Ill.:  Free Press.
- Little, P . D., and M. J. Watts, eds.  . Living Under Contract: Contract Farming and Agrarian Transformation in Sub-Saharan Africa . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- LN [League of Nations].  . Advisory Committee on Traffic in Opium and Other Dangerous Drugs, Minutes of the Fourteenth Session.  January to  February  , Geneva, League of Nations,  - . Lowry, H. W.  . An Ongoing Affair: Turkey and I . Istanbul: Isis Press.
- McSweeney, K.  . The Dugout Canoe Trade in Central America's Mosquitia: Approaching Rural Livelihoods through Systems of Exchange. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Merlin, M. D.  . On the Trail of the Ancient Opium Poppy . Rutherford, N.J.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.
- Mitchell, T.  . Rule of Experts: Egypt, Techno-Politics, Modernity . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Netting, R. M.  . Cultural Ecology.  nd ed. Prospect Heights, Ill.: Waveland Press.
- ---.  . Smallholders, Householders: Farm Families and the Ecology of Intensive, Sustainable Agriculture . Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
- Newsday staff and editors.  . The Heroin Trail: The First Journalistic Investigation to Trace Heroin Traffic from Turkey to France to Its Ultimate Customer  the Young American Addict! New York: New American Library.
- Özyürek, E., ed.  . The Politics of Public Memory in Turkey .  Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press.
- Poroy, I. I.  . Expansion of Opium Production in Turkey and the State Monopoly of  - . International Journal of Middle East Studies  (  ):  - .
- Republic of Turkey.  . Facts on Turkish Poppy . Ankara: Basin-Yayin Genel Müdürlügü.
- Ricoeur, P.  - . Time and Narrative . Translated by K. McLaughlin and D. Pellauer.  vols. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- ---.  . Memory, History, Forgetting . Translated by K. Blamey and D. Pellauer. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Sauer, C. O.  . The Morphology of Landscape. University of California Publications in Geography, vol.  , no.  . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- ---.  . The Early Spanish Main . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Schmidt, J.  . From Anatolia to Indonesia: Opium Trade and the Dutch Community of Izmir,  - .  Leiden: Netherlands Historisch-Archaeologisch Instituut.
- Scott, J.  C.  . Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have Failed . New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press.
- Spain, J. W.  . The United States, Turkey, and the Poppy. Middle East Journal  (  ):  - .
- Stirling, P ., ed.  . Culture and Economy: Changes in Turkish Villages . Huntingdon, England: Eothen. Striffler, S.  . In the Shadows of the State and Capital: The United Fruit Company, Popular Struggle, and Agrarian Restructuring in Ecuador,  - . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.

History from Below: Studies in Popular edited by F. Krantz,



-

. Oxford: Basil



- T. C. Basbakanlik (Turkish Republic's Prime Ministry).  . Tarimsal Göstergeler:  - (Agricultural Indicators:  - ). Ankara: Devlet Istatistik Enstitüsü Matbaasi.
2. ---.  . Tarimsal Yapi: Üretim, Fiyat, Deger (Agricultural Structure: Production, Price, Value). Ankara: Devlet Istatistik Enstitüsü Matbaasi.
3. Tüzel, A.  . Burdur'un Iktisadi Vaziyeti (The Economic Situation of Burdur). Burdur Halkevi Dergisi (The Burdur People's House Journal)  (  ):  - .
4. UNINCB [United Nations International Narcotics Control Board].  . Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs. [www.incb.org/incb/convention\_  .html].
5. UNODC [United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime].  . The Cultivation of the Opium Poppy in Turkey. UNODC Bulletin  (  ):  - . [www.unodc.org/unodc/en/data-and-analysis/bulletin/bulletin\_  - - \_  \_page  .html].
6. Uslu, N.  . The Turkish-American Relationship between  and  : The History of a Distinctive Alliance . Hauppauge, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers.
7. Vansina, J.  . Living with Africa. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
8. Williams, S.  . On Islands, Insularity, and Opium Poppies: Australia's Secret Pharmacy. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space  (  ):  - .
9. Zürcher, E. J.  . Turkey: A Modern History.  rd ed. London: I. B. Tauris.