## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Future Extreme Event Risk in the Rural Northeastern United States

Jonathan M. Winter, Fiona L. Bowen, Trevor F. Partridge &amp; Jonathan W. Chipman

To cite this article: Jonathan M. Winter, Fiona L. Bowen, Trevor F. Partridge &amp; Jonathan W. Chipman (2019): Future Extreme Event Risk in the Rural Northeastern United States, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1540920

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1540920

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 21 Mar 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 56

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Future Extreme Event Risk in the Rural Northeastern United States

Jonathan M. Winter  , Fiona L. Bowen † , Trevor F. Partridge ‡ , and Jonathan W. Chipman §



<!-- image -->

Department of Geography, Dartmouth College † Dartmouth College ‡ Department of Earth Sciences, Dartmouth College § Department of Geography and Department of Earth Sciences, Dartmouth College

Future climate change impacts on humans will be determined by the convergence of evolving physical climate and socioeconomic systems. Rural areas of the northeastern United States have experienced increased temperature and precipitation extremes, especially over the past three decades, and face unique challenges due to their physical isolation, natural-resource -dependent economies, and high poverty rates. To explore the impacts of future extreme events on vulnerable, rural populations in the Northeast, we analyzed future (2046 -2075) annual maximum daily maximum temperature, annual minimum daily minimum temperature, annual maximum daily precipitation, and annual minimum two-week summer precipitation for two greenhouse gas emissions scenarios using four global climate models and gridded temperature and precipitation observations. We then combined those projections with estimates of county-level population and relative income for 2060 to calculate changes in extreme person-events compared to a historical period (1976 -2005), with a focus on Northeast counties that are rural (less than 250,000 people) and vulnerable (in the bottom income quartile). For all counties and lowest income quartile counties in the rural Northeast, extreme heat person-events increase nineteen-fold and twenty-nine fold, respectively, under the high greenhouse gas emissions scenario, far exceeding the decrease in extreme cold person-events. The number of extreme precipitation and drought person-events does not significantly change across the rural Northeast. For the high greenhouse gas emissions scenario, counties in the bottom two income quartiles experience the 1976 -2005 once-per-year daily heat event twenty-three times per year by 2046 -2075; the lower greenhouse gas emissions scenario reduces the incidence to eleven times per year. Key Words: climate change, climate impacts, extreme events, northeastern United States, vulnerability.

未来 气 候 变 迁 对 人 类 的 冲击 ， 将 取 决 于 演 化 中 的 环 境 气 候 和 社 会 经 济 系 统 的 聚 合 。 美 国 东 北 部 的 乡 村 地 区 ， 特 别 是 在 过 去 三 十 年 来 ， 经 历 了 逐 渐 升 高 的 气 温 和 极 端 降雨 ， 并 面 临 因 其 物 理 环 境 孤 立 、 倚 赖 自 然 资 源 的 经 济 、 以 及 高 度 的 贫 穷 率 所 导 致 的 特 殊 挑 战 。 为了 探 讨 未来极 端 气 候 事件 对 东 北 部 脆 弱 乡 村 人 口 的 冲击 ， 我 们 运 用 四 大 全 球 气 候 模 型 和 网 格 化 的 气 温 与 降雨 观 察 ， 分 析 在 两 种 温 室 气 体 排 放 情 境 下 ， 未来 （ 2046-2075 ） 的 年度 最 大 每 日 最 高 气 温 、 年度 每 日 最 低 气 温 、 年度 最 大 的 每 日 降雨 ， 以 及 年度 最 低 的 双 週 夏 季 降雨 。 我 们 接 着 结 合 这 些 预 测 与 2060 年 的 郡 县 层 级 人 口及 所 得 评 估 ， 计 算 相 较 于 历史 时 期 （ 1976-2005 ） 的 极 端 人 -事件之 改 变 ， 并 聚 焦 东 北 部 的 乡 村 （ 少 于二 十 五万人 ） 和 脆 弱 （ 在 所 得 四 分 位 的 底 层 ） 郡 县 。 在 高 度 温 室 气 体 排 放 的 情 境 中 ， 所 有 郡 县 以 及 东 北 部 乡 村 中 所 得 四 分 位 最 低 的 郡 县 中 ， 极 端 炎热 的 人 -事件 分别 增 加 十 九 倍 与二 十 九 倍 ， 远远 超 出 极 端 寒 冷 的 人 -事件之 减 少 。 在 东 北 部 乡 村 地 区 ， 极 端 降雨 与乾 旱 的 人 -事件 数 并 未 显 着 改 变 。 在 高 度 温 室 气 体 排 放 的 情 境 中 ， 位 于 所 得 四 分 位 的 最 低 两 层 级 之 郡 县 ， 将 在 2046 年 至 2075 年 间 ， 每 年 经 历 二 十 三 次 在 1976 年 至 2005 年 间 每 年 只 经 历 一 次 的 每 日 炎热 事件 ； 较 低 温 室 气 体 排 放 的 情 境 ， 则 将 该 事件 降 低 至 每 年 十 一 次 。 词 ： 气 候 变 迁 ， 气 候 冲 击 ， 极 端 事件 ， 美 国 东 北 部 ， 脆 弱 性 。

Los impactos del futuro cambio clim  atico sobre los humanos se determinar  an por la convergencia del clima f  ı sico en evoluci  on y los sistemas socioecon  omicos. Las  areas rurales del Nordeste de los Estados Unidos han experimentado condiciones extremas de aumento de la temperatura y las precipitaciones, especialmente durante las pasadas tres d  ecadas, y enfrentan retos muy singulares debido a su aislamiento f  ı sico, sus econom  ı as dependientes de los recursos naturales y las altas tasas de pobreza. Para explorar los futuros impactos de eventos extremos sobre las poblaciones rurales vulnerables del Nordeste, analizamos condiciones futuras (2046 -2075) de la temperatura m  axima diaria del m  aximo anual, la temperatura m  ı nima diaria del m  ı nimo anual, la precipitaci  on diaria del m  aximo anual y la precipitaci  on de dos semanas del verano en el m  ı nimo anual en dos escenarios de emisiones de gas de invernadero, utilizando cuatro modelos de clima

<!-- image -->

## Winter et al.

global y las observaciones en cuadr  ı cula de temperatura y precipitaci  on. Despu  es combinamos estas proyecciones con estimativos de poblaci  on e ingreso relativo a nivel de condado en el 2060 para calcular cambios en eventos extremos-personas comparados con un per  ı odo hist  orico (1976 -2005), todo esto enfocado a condados del Nordeste con predominio de condiciones rurales (menos de 250.000 personas) y vulnerables (en el cuartil de ingreso m  as bajo). Para todos los condados y para los condados del cuartil m  as bajo de ingreso en el Nordeste rural, los eventos extremos-personas de calor se incrementaron diecinueve y veintinueve veces, respectivamente, bajo escenarios de emisiones de gases de invernadero altas, excediendo ampliamente la disminuci  on en eventos extremos-personas por fr  ı o. El n  umero de eventos extremos-personas en precipitaci  on y sequ  ı a no cambia significativamente a trav  es del Nordeste rural. Para el escenario de altas emisiones de gases de invernadero, los condados que se ubican en los dos cuartiles inferiores de ingreso experimentan el evento diario de calor que ocurre una vez por a ~ no entre 1976 -2005 veintitr  es veces por a ~ no en el lapso 2046 -2075; el escenario de emisiones m  as bajas de gases de invernadero reduce la incidencia a once veces por a ~ no. Palabras clave: cambio clim  atico, impactos clim  aticos, eventos extremos, nordeste de los Estados Unidos, vulnerabilidad.

E xtreme weather events have wide-ranging impacts on human and natural systems, and climate change has increased both the frequency and severity of some extreme events in the United States (Walsh et al. 2014). Extreme heat is the leading cause of weather-related deaths in the United States and can damage and disrupt infrastructure, affect water quality, and drive up cooling costs (Meyer, Amekudzi, and O 0 Har 2010; Sathaye et al. 2013; Glibert et al. 2014; Guilbert et al. 2014; Coffel and Horton 2015; National Weather Service 2017). Extreme cold is associated with mortality, infrastructure damage, and increased heating costs (Kalkstein and Greene 1997; Horton et al. 2010; Guilbert et al. 2014). Extreme rainfall events can result in deaths, extensive infrastructure damage, and reduced water quality (Villarini et al. 2014; Saharia et al. 2017; Sinha, Michalak, and Balaji 2017), and extreme drought events can result in water shortages, exacerbate heat waves, decrease agricultural productivity, damage forests, intensify wildfires, and harm tourism (Huntington et al. 2009; Peterson et al. 2013; Clark et al. 2016). Although the societal impact of any single extreme event depends on a number of interconnected socioeconomic and climatic variables, extreme events across the Northeast have increased historically and are expected to increase in the future, enhancing the potential for societal harm and economic loss due to climate change (Hsiang et al. 2017).

Across the Northeast, Donat et al. (2013) found a significant increase between 1950 and 2010 in the warm spell duration index, defined as the annual count of at least six consecutive days with maximum temperature (Tx) greater than the 90th percentile of approximately 1.0 day decade   1 . Donat et al. (2013) also found an associated significant decrease in the cold spell duration index, defined as the annual count of at least six consecutive days with minimum temperature (Tn) less than the 10th percentile of approximately 0.5 days decade   1 . Although hottest day and coldest night temperatures have increased, the changes are not significant (Donat et al. 2013). Smith, Zaitchik, and Gohlke (2013) used a variety of heat wave definitions to examine changes in heat extremes from 1979 to 2011, finding that for one definition, average daily temperature in excess of the 90th percentile for two or more days, the Northeast experienced an increase of 3.5 days decade   1 . Daily precipitation (P) extreme values have also been increasing, especially over the past three decades. Although estimates of extreme precipitation change vary by region, data used, and time period considered, multiple studies have confirmed a dramatic increase in Northeast extreme precipitation events (Kunkel et al. 2013; Walsh et al. 2014; Frei, Kunkel, and Matonse 2015; Hoerling et al. 2016; Marquardt Collow, Bosilovich, and Koster 2016; Huang et al. 2017). Kunkel et al. (2013) discovered significant increases in both one-in-five-year two-day precipitation events and the amount of precipitation falling on the 1 percent wettest days during the time period 1957 to 2010 for the Northeast. Huang et al. (2017) found the change in extreme precipitation, defined as the amount of precipitation falling on the 1 percent of wet days recording the most precipitation, to be best characterized as an abrupt shift, with 1996 to 2014 receiving 53 percent more extreme precipitation than 1901 to 1995. Consistent with the increase in both mean and extreme precipitation,

the Northeast has not experienced increasing drought since the mid-twentieth century (Dai 2013; Peterson et al. 2013). Rather, the number of months with the Palmer Hydrological Drought Index less than or equal to -2.0 (moderate to extreme drought) has generally decreased, substantially in some areas (Peterson et al. 2013).

Several studies have examined climate change projections of extreme events across the Northeast (Thibeault and Seth 2014; Horton et al. 2015; Ning, Riddle, and Bradley 2015; Zhou and Lau 2017). Horton et al. (2015) found that the once-per-year maximum temperature is expected to increase by approximately 4  C, and the once-per-year annual minimum temperature is expected to increase by about 5  C in 2051 to 2069 relative to 1981 to 1998. For a case study of Baltimore, this translated into maximum temperature in 2051 to 2069 exceeding the baseline (1971 -2000) once-per-year Tx seventeen times and reducing the once-per-year Tn to occurring approximately once every three years (Horton et al. 2015). Consistent with Horton et al. (2015), Thibeault and Seth (2014) found changes in warm spell duration (maximum period of greater than five consecutive days with &gt; 90th percentile Tx) and cold spell duration (maximum period of greater than five consecutive days with &lt; 10th percentile Tn) of 700 percent and -95 percent, respectively, by 2041 to 2070 relative to a 1961 to 1990 baseline. Ning, Riddle, and Bradley (2015) also showed a significant increase in warm days, defined as the number of days with &gt; 90th percentile Tx, and decrease in cold nights, defined as the number of days with &lt; 10th percentile Tn, for 2050 to 2099 relative to 1950 to 1999. The change in warm days far outpaced the change in cold nights (Ning, Riddle, and Bradley 2015). The number and intensity of extreme precipitation events are also projected to increase. Ning, Riddle, and Bradley (2015) found a significantly higher number of very wet days (number of days with &gt; 95th percentile daily precipitation) in 2050 to 2099 relative to 1950 to 1999, and Thibeault and Seth (2014) found an increase in the amount of extremely wet day precipitation (amount of precipitation from &gt; 99th percentile wet days) of 58 percent between 1961 to 1990 and 2041 to 2070. Thibeault and Seth (2014) calculated a relatively small (3 percent) but significant increase in consecutive dry days by midcentury. This agrees with Hayhoe et al. (2007), who found a considerable although not significant increase of short-, medium-, and long-term drought in 2035 to 2064 relative to 1961 to 1990. Hayhoe et al. (2007), however, did see statistically significant enhanced drought by the end of the century for the highest greenhouse gas emissions scenario.

The increase in extreme events across the Northeast will occur against a backdrop of regional socioeconomic change. During the past two centuries, the Northeast has experienced complex spatiotemporal patterns of population growth and decline, land use change, and economic transformation. Economic development of the rural Northeast was characterized by early, geographically dispersed industrialization driven first by water power and then by coal (Frank 2011). Much of the region underwent a relative economic decline beginning in the late nineteenth century (Goldthwait 1927; Paterson 1982), although this was complicated by shifts among sectors and concentration of productivity (Bell 1989). Since 1950, there have been contradictory subregional trends in both urban and rural areas of the Northeast. The renaissance and growth of large urban centers in New York and Boston contrast the steep population declines in second-tier cities such as Pittsburgh, Buffalo, Newark, Rochester, and Syracuse (Rappaport 2003). Meanwhile, many rural areas have experienced population declines due to migration resulting from economic stagnation, as well as aging and declining birth rates (Glasgow and Brown 2012; Johnson, Field, and Poston 2015). Some rural areas with more favorable economic geography have experienced in-migration due to exurban sprawl and its associated influx of wealth (Brown et al. 2005; Mockrin et al. 2013). Rural areas on the inland fringe of the Northeast tend to have rapidly aging populations and low birth-todeath ratios, particularly in West Virginia, western Pennsylvania, and northern Maine, whereas coastal counties are experiencing more economic and population growth (Johnson, Field, and Poston 2015). These spatially complex demographic and economic trends will heavily influence which areas are most and least prepared to cope with future intensification of extreme events in the Northeast.

Several studies have assessed the effects of climate change on society at varying scales through combining climate projections with current and projected population demographics (Westerling and Bryant 2008; Wu et al. 2014; Neumann et al. 2015). Westerling and Bryant (2008) coupled a logistic

probability model of wildfire risk as a function of projected climate under two greenhouse gas emission scenarios with census data denoting the density of residential buildings to model property damages due to increased wildfire risk for the early, middle, and late twenty-first century. Neumann et al. (2015) evaluated the susceptibility of coastal communities globally using four socioeconomic scenarios, which combined a spatial assessment of present coastal populations with United Nations statistical demographic projections, and four sea-level rise scenarios derived from a database of 100-year water levels and mean global sea-level rise. Focusing on a region closer to the Northeast, Wu et al. (2014) estimated countylevel climate change impacts for the eastern United States using midcentury hourly temperature data from two greenhouse gas emission scenarios coupled with projected county demographic data. Specifically, the authors downscaled daily climate projections from the National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Earth System Model (CESM1.0) using the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model for the last three years of the 2050s to estimate future heat waves. By synthesizing climate projections and mid-century county-level demographics from U.S. Census Bureau state-level projections and county-specific population ratios in 2000, they found that heat waves in the eastern United States will be 3.5 to 6.4 times more likely by mid-century and that excess mortality attributable to heat waves will be 7.5 to 19.0 times higher relative to a 2000 to 2004 baseline.

Modifying definitions from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report (IPCC AR5; IPCC 2014), we combine hazard, vulnerability, and exposure to describe risk as the potential for extreme temperature and precipitation events driven by climate change to adversely affect rural populations in the Northeast. In this study, hazard is the potential occurrence of extreme events across the Northeast, exposure is the presence of people where extreme events occur, and vulnerability is the propensity of people to be adversely affected, assessed using relative median income. We note that societal vulnerability is complex and can be conceptualized in a number of ways, incorporating demographics, socioeconomic status, gender, age, health, race, ethnicity, and social structure (Otto et al.

Figure 1. Map of the eastern United States, with the study domain (northeastern United States) highlighted. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

2017). Our justification for focusing on rural areas is threefold. First, although the Northeast contains some of the largest metropolitan areas in the country, the majority of its land area is dominated by small, rural communities, and the northeastern states of Maine, Vermont, and West Virginia are the three most rural states in the United States by percentage of state population (U.S. Census Bureau 2012). Second, rural communities can be more vulnerable to climate extremes due to less diverse and often natural resource -dependent economies, limited access to emergency response and climate change adaptation funding, low population densities, aging and high-poverty residents, and inadequate telecommunication networks (Rosenzweig et al. 2011; Glasgow and Brown 2012; Kapucu, Hawkins, and Rivera 2013; Hales et al. 2014). Finally, relative to urban climate change impacts in the region, the effects of climate change on rural areas have been underevaluated (e.g., Li, Horton, and Kinney 2013; Edwards and Bulkeley 2017; Lee et al. 2017).

Specifically, we add to the existing literature by (1) projecting population and relative income changes for rural counties of the Northeast; (2) assessing future changes in county-level extreme temperature and precipitation events for the Northeast; (3) identifying areas where vulnerable, rural populations and substantial changes in extreme events overlap; and (4) analyzing the sensitivity of Northeast rural extreme event climate change impacts to greenhouse gas emissions scenario, global climate model, and population projections.

## Data and Methods

We define the Northeast as Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, Rhode Island, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Maryland, Washington, DC, Delaware, and West Virginia (Figure 1), consistent with Walsh et al. (2014). Changes in extreme events were calculated by modifying daily historical (1976 -2005) maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation data from gridded observations using global climate model (GCM) simulations of historical (1976 -2005) and future climate (2046 -2075). Changes in population and vulnerability indicators at the county level were derived from the Integrated Climate and Land Use Scenarios program (ICLUS;

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2013) and the U.S. Census Bureau (2013, 2016). A complete list of acronyms used in this study is provided in Table A.1.

## Climate Data and Projections

Gridded observations were developed by Livneh et al. (2013), hereafter LI2013, for the contiguous United States based on the methods of Maurer et al. (2002). Maurer et al. (2002) has been widely used in water and energy budget studies as well as climate change assessments (Wood et al. 2004; Westerling et al. 2006; Hayhoe et al. 2007; Elsner et al. 2014). LI2013 is derived from daily temperature and precipitation observations from approximately 20,000 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Cooperative Observer (COOP) stations gridded to a spatial resolution of 1/16  (  7km). Available daily meteorological data include maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation, as well as wind from reanalysis, covering the time period 1915 to 2011 (Livneh et al. 2013). Additional details of LI2013 can be found in Livneh et al. (2013).

Projections of maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation were derived from four realizations of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 multimodel ensemble (CMIP5; Taylor, Stouffer, and Meehl 2012). CMIP5 is the basis for IPCC AR5 (IPCC 2013), heavily informs the U.S. Third National Climate Assessment (NCA; Walsh et al. 2014), and has been extensively evaluated and used for climate change research. CMIP5 simulations employ four different representative concentration pathways (RCPs; Moss et al. 2010), which are a set of greenhouse gas, aerosol, and land use scenarios that describe possible future emissions trajectories. Each RCP is distinguished by its radiative forcing in watts per square meter by the end of the century, from RCP 2.6 to RCP 8.5. We use RCPs 4.5 and 8.5, which describe a moderate and high greenhouse gas emissions scenario, respectively, to explore a range of potential future extreme events. RCP 4.5 estimates greenhouse gas emissions will peak around 2040, after which they begin to decline, resulting in a projected global mean surface temperature increase likely range of 1.1  C to 2.6  C by the end of the century. RCP

8.5 estimates that greenhouse gas emissions will continue to rise through 2100, resulting in a likely increase of projected global mean surface temperature of 2.6  C to 4.8  C by the end of the century (IPCC 2013).

We use four GCMs that bracket the range of changes in temperature and precipitation for the Northeast. To determine these four GCMs we calculated the annually averaged change in mean temperature and precipitation between 2046 and 2075 and 1976 and 2005 for RCP8.5 and then selected the GCMs with the highest and lowest changes in precipitation and temperature. The resulting four GCMs include the Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, and National Institute for Environmental Studies MIROC-ESM-CHEM (second largest precipitation increase); Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace IPSL-CM5A-LR (smallest precipitation increase); Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory GFDL-CM3 (greatest temperature increase); and Institute for Numerical Mathematics INM-CM4 (smallest temperature increase). MIROCESM-CHEM was used instead of NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies GISS-E2-R (largest precipitation increase) because GISS-E2-R daily data for RCP 8.5 were unavailable.

Future climate scenarios were constructed using the difference between future and historical GCM simulations to modify the LI2013 data set. First, we averaged the daily GCM time series for maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation by month. Second, we used the monthly data to calculate future (RCP 4.5 and RCP 8.5, 2046 -2075) and historical (1976 -2005) seasonal cycles for each GCM. Third, we regridded the set of GCM seasonal cycles to match the LI2013 data set using a nearest neighbor approach. Fourth, we averaged the LI2013 maximum temperature, minimum temperature, and precipitation daily time series, as well as the GCM seasonal cycles, by county. Finally, we adjusted each day of the county averaged LI2013 observations using the difference between future and historical monthly seasonal cycles (additive for temperature, multiplicative for precipitation). This method, referred to as change factors or a delta approach (e.g., Arnell and Reynard 1996; Prudhomme, Reynard, and Crooks 2002; Asseng et al. 2013), both reduces model bias influence on future projections and retains observed climate variability. Although using observed climate variability can prevent unrealistic climate variability in future scenarios, which GCMs struggle to simulate in hindcasts, this method only changes the variable mean by month, therefore neglecting any changes between years and within months (Wilby et al. 2009). Two rural counties (Bristol County, Rhode Island, and Nantucket County, Massachusetts) were excluded from our analyses because they are completely undefined in the LI2013 data set.

## Extreme Metrics

We use four extreme climate metrics to assess the impacts of climate change on rural Northeast populations: number of days above the annual (once-per-year) maximum daily maximum temperature (Txax), number of days below the annual minimum daily minimum temperature (Tnan), number of days above the annual maximum daily precipitation (Pax), and number of days below the annual twoweek summer (May -August) precipitation minimum (SPan). There are a variety of extreme event metrics that have been used globally and for the United States (e.g., Frich et al. 2002; Horton et al. 2015; Schoof and Robeson 2016). We choose these metrics based on three criteria. First, metrics must have potential societal impacts for the Northeast. Second, metrics must be event based, such that the number of events multiplied by population yields a meaningful quantity. Third, metrics must be calculated using anomalies to prevent underlying climate from dominating results. For example, days with Tx over a fixed threshold would be concentrated in the southern part of the domain. Using anomalies is also intuitive from an impacts perspective, as areas with higher temperatures or more precipitation over the historical period would have some adaptive capacity (e.g., community accessible air conditioning, flood prevention infrastructure). We acknowledge that sea-level rise will cause substantial climate change impacts along the coastal Northeast; however, we do not include sea-level rise in our assessment because it has been extensively addressed in previous literature (e.g., Sallenger, Doran, and Howd 2012; Moftakhari et al. 2015; Hauer, Evans, and Mishra 2016) and disproportionately affects urban areas.

Thresholds for each extreme climate metric were calculated by county using LI2013 observations from 1976 to 2005. Specifically, we take the

Figure 2. Extreme thresholds calculated from historical (1976 -2005) climate. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the 2060 lowest median income quartile are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

thirty years of daily data for Tx, Tn, and P and set the thresholds for Txax, Tnan, and Pax equal to the thirtieth highest value for Tx, thirtieth highest value for P, and thirtieth lowest for Tn, respectively. The threshold for SPan was calculated using a similar method but with an added step of first summing daily precipitation over eight two-week periods starting 1 May and then extracting the thirtieth lowest value for the SPan threshold. Once thresholds were set, we then determined the number of events that exceeded each threshold (above Txax and Pax, below Tnan and SPan) for the historical (1976 -2005) observations and four future (2046 -2075) climate scenarios. Figure 2 contains county climate extreme metric thresholds, with future (2060) vulnerable counties highlighted in red. Extreme person-events were calculated by multiplying the number of extreme events by

population. The significance of the differences between historical and future extreme events and extreme person-events was tested with a Wilcoxon rank sum test using MATLAB ' s ranksum function (Hollander and Wolfe 1999; Gibbons and Chakraborti 2011). We assessed differences in extreme events and extreme person-events for the entire Northeast and each income quartile, using an adjusted test-wise alpha of 0.0026 determined by Walker ' s criterion (Wilks 2016).

## Demographic Data and Projections

Rural population projections for 2060 were obtained from ICLUS (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 2013). ICLUS was developed to provide spatially distributed projections of population and land use within the United States consistent with the Special Report on Emissions Scenarios

Figure 3. Comparison of predicted and observed median income rank for 2010. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

(SRES) from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report. For compatibility with the CMIP5 RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 used in this project, the ICLUS population projections for the SRES A2 and B1 scenarios were averaged. These county-level population projections were used to obtain an estimate of the number of persons affected by extreme climate events. Using ICLUS as the source for population projections offers several advantages: county-level spatial resolution, consistent demographic models across state boundaries, and complete coverage through the time period being analyzed. Among the alternative sources considered, the U.S. Census Bureau no longer produces subnational population projections; individual state population projections are inconsistent in both time period and demographic assumptions; and as of the time of writing, the population projections from the IPCC AR5 Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSP) database have not been downscaled to the U.S. county level (KC and Lutz 2017).

We identify counties with the most vulnerable populations based on projections of relative median income. Given the disparate and unknown patterns of technological, economic, and social change that the Northeast is likely to experience over the coming four decades, predicting specific county-level median income with confidence would be difficult. Instead, we rely on projections of relative median income, on the assumption that the poorest quartile of counties can be predicted more robustly than the actual median incomes of those counties. Each county ' s recent trend in median income (using census data from 1990 -2010) was calculated using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression and then extrapolated. The extrapolated values were ranked to assign each county to a quartile. As proof of concept, this method was used retrospectively to project ranked median income levels in 2010 using census data from 1970 to 1990. Figure 3 shows the predicted versus observed 2010 median income rank for all rural counties in the region.

Table 1. Population by median income quartile based on 2010 U.S. Census Bureau data and predicted population by extrapolated median income quartile for 2060

| Scenario        | Income Q1   | Income Q2   | Income Q3   | Income Q4   | Sum        |
|-----------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|------------|
| Counties 2010   | 55          | 58          | 58          | 57          | 228        |
| Population 2010 | 5.67E þ 06  | 4.47E þ 06  | 3.75E þ 06  | 2.33E þ 06  | 1.62E þ 07 |
| Counties 2060   | 56          | 57          | 58          | 57          | 228        |
| Population 2060 | 5.65E þ 06  | 4.14E þ 06  | 1.91E þ 06  | 3.03E þ 06  | 1.47E þ 07 |

Figure 4. Historical (2010) and future (2060) county populations. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the lowest median income quartile for each time period are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Number of extreme events for the historical scenario, and median global climate model (GCM) number of extreme events for four future scenarios, per year per county

|       | Scenario            | Income Q1   | Income Q2   | Income Q3   | Income Q4   | Average   |
|-------|---------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-----------|
| Tx ax | E1990, P2010        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00      |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 9.61              | 10.15              | 10.74              | 11.65              | 10.54            |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 19.39              | 21.13              | 22.38              | 23.08              | 21.52            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 9.42              | 10.27              | 11.16              | 11.30              | 10.54            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 18.92              | 21.28              | 22.84              | 22.95              | 21.52            |
| Tn an | E1990, P2010        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00      |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 0.25              | 0.21              | 0.25              | 0.37              | 0.27            |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 0.17              | 0.12              | 0.16              | 0.28              | 0.19            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 0.25              | 0.22              | 0.29              | 0.31              | 0.27            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 0.18              | 0.14              | 0.21              | 0.22              | 0.19            |
| P ax  | E1990, P2010        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00      |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 1.22              | 1.22              | 1.20              | 1.14        | 1.19            |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 1.15              | 1.14        | 1.16        | 1.13        | 1.15            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 1.22              | 1.21              | 1.19              | 1.16              | 1.19            |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 1.17              | 1.13        | 1.17              | 1.12        | 1.15            |
| SP an | E1990, P2010        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00        | 1.00      |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 0.91        | 0.91        | 0.91        | 0.93        | 0.91      |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 0.92        | 0.93        | 0.91        | 0.95        | 0.93      |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 0.91        | 0.91        | 0.91        | 0.92        | 0.91      |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 0.92        | 0.93        | 0.92        | 0.94        | 0.93      |

 Change is significant at p &lt; 0.0026.

## Results and Discussion

We assess climate change impacts on the rural Northeast by quantifying the number of future (2046 -2075) extreme events both spatially and aggregated by median income quartile, combining projections of extreme events with projections of population, and exploring the sensitivity of our results to climate projection uncertainty across both GCMs and RCPs.

## Future Vulnerable Populations

The population of the Northeast is forecast to increase by 21 million from 2010 to 2060, but that population growth will be predominantly in nonrural counties excluded from this study. The 228 rural counties described here are projected to experience a net decrease of 1.5 million by 2060 (Table 1), primarily due to aging populations and low birth rates. Population and vulnerability projections include

Figure 5. Future (2046 -2075) median global climate model number of extreme temperature events per year. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the 2060 lowest median income quartile are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

both changes in population for each county and the movement of counties across median income quartiles. Northeast rural population losses are concentrated in the western Northeast, from West Virginia to New York, as well as across northern Vermont and New Hampshire (Figure 4). In contrast, counties closer to the Atlantic coast, especially in the southern portion of the region (Maryland and Delaware), are more likely to have increasing populations.

The spatial patterns of projected change in vulnerable counties (lowest median income quartile; Q4) are dominated by shifts within the western fringe of the Northeast (Figure 4). In 2010, West Virginia included 67 percent of the region ' s most vulnerable counties; by 2060, this is projected to decrease to 40 percent. The compensating increases are mostly located in the western portions of Pennsylvania and New York State, which represent

Figure 6. Future (2046 -2075) median global climate model number of extreme precipitation events per year. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the 2060 lowest median income quartile are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

25 percent and 30 percent, respectively, of the most vulnerable counties in 2060, up from 14 percent and 12 percent in 2010. Further east the relatively low vulnerability across the six New England states persists with little change: three lowest median income counties in 2010 and one in 2060. Likewise, vulnerability in the Atlantic coastal counties is sparse in 2010 and remains so in 2060, although most coastal counties are excluded from this study due to urbanization.

## Future Extreme Event Occurrence

Table 2 describes the median GCM increase of average extreme events per year for counties in each median income quartile, where income Q1 and

income Q4 contain the rural counties with the highest and lowest median incomes, respectively, in the Northeast. Four different future scenarios and the baseline are considered: extreme events 2046 to 2075 (centered on 2060), population and income in 2010, RCP 4.5 (E2060, P2010, RCP45); extreme events in 2046 to 2075, population and income in 2010, RCP 8.5 (E2060, P2010, RCP85); extreme events in 2046 to 2075, population and income in 2060, RCP 4.5 (E2060, P2060, RCP45); and extreme events in 2046 to 2075, population and income in 2060, RCP 8.5 (E2060, P2060, RCP85). Extreme event occurrence for all metrics in the historical period (E1990, P2010) is by definition one event per year.

Figures 5 and 6 show the median GCM future (2046 -2075) yearly extreme event occurrence for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5. As in Table 2, extreme event occurrence for all metrics in the historical period (1976 -2005) is by definition one event per year. Both figures depict the number of events that each individual within the county would experience in an average year, with numbers greater than one indicating multiple events per year (an increase from the baseline) and numbers less than one indicating multiple years between events (a decrease from the baseline). Color bar limits were set to balance displaying differences between all counties and capturing the full range of county-level extreme event occurrence.

Averaged over the Northeast, daily maximum temperatures exceeding the historical annual (onceper-year) maximum temperature (Txax) increase significantly: 10.54 times for RCP 4.5 and 21.52 times for RCP 8.5 (Table 2). For both RCPs, the most vulnerable counties (lowest median income quartile) experience slightly elevated Txax event increases relative to richer counties. The future Txax event increases vary across the Northeast from approximately five to fifteen times for RCP 4.5 and fifteen to twenty-five times for RCP 8.5 (Figure 5). Inland counties with climates not moderated by the Atlantic Ocean tend to experience the most exceedances of Txax, mainly under RCP 8.5. Consistent with the results of Table 2, the concentration of Txax events over the western portion of the Northeast disproportionately affects rural, vulnerable populations, as eastern counties are generally more affluent and populous. Counties with especially high increases in Txax events include Cattaraugus (RCP 4.5 ¼ 13.02, RCP 8.5 ¼ 28.82) in New York and surrounding counties east of Lake Erie and Marion (RCP 4.5 ¼ 14.78, RCP 8.5 ¼ 28.68), Taylor (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼ 14.07, RCP 8.5 ¼ 29.37), Barbour (RCP 4.5 ¼ 14.88, RCP 8.5 ¼ 30.03), and Harrison (RCP 4.5 ¼ 15.52, RCP 8.5 ¼ 28.77) counties, all in West Virginia.

Future annual daily minimum temperatures below the historical once-per-year daily minimum temperature (Tnan) are significantly reduced for the Northeast as a whole and within each income quartile. For RCPs 4.5 and 8.5, Tnan events across the Northeast shift to about a one-in-four-year occurrence and one-in-five-year occurrence, respectively. This is expected as the temperature change from GCMs forced with RCP 8.5 is larger than the temperature change from GCMs forced with RCP 4.5 due to the greater greenhouse gas emissions of RCP 8.5. Whereas warming winter temperatures can be detrimental to tourism, specifically snow sports (Burakowski et al. 2008), a reduction in cold extremes is beneficial, decreasing human injury and mortality, heating costs, and infrastructure damage (Isaac and van Vuuren 2009). Figures 5B and 5D show reduced Tnan across the Northeast, and particularly in the north. The Tnan metric cannot fall below zero, which corresponds with a county never exceeding the Tnan threshold. In West Virginia, Tnan events will occur every other or every third year under RCP 8.5, whereas for some counties in northern New York, Vermont, New Hampshire, and Maine, temperatures will only drop below Tnan every ten to fifty 50 years. This signal is consistent with increased warming at high latitudes, especially in the context of warmer temperatures driven by reduced snow cover and as a result lower albedo in the winter months. Generally, Tnan events decrease less over vulnerable counties, although populations in New York and Maine do experience a substantial decline in extreme cold days. Reductions in Tnan events for RCP 4.5 are typically less than reductions in Tnan events for RCP 8.5, especially for the northern counties of the Northeast. Here, the frequency of temperatures below Tnan increases from about once every ten to fifty years for RCP 8.5 to once every three to ten years for RCP 4.5.

Future precipitation extreme events change less dramatically relative to temperature extreme events (Table 2, Figure 6). This is expected, as precipitation both has a higher variability than temperature and is more difficult to simulate than temperature due to the

Figure 7. Difference between future (E2060, P2060) median global climate model and historical (E1990, P2010) number of extreme temperature person-events per year. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the 2060 lowest median income quartile are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

complex processes that control it. On average, the rural Northeast will experience an approximately 15 percent increase in historical once-per-year daily precipitation (Pax ) for RCP 8.5. Unlike temperature, which has a larger change under a higher greenhouse gas emissions scenario (RCP 8.5), the average increase in Pax events for RCP 4.5 is 20 percent. For RCP 4.5, Q1 and Q2 counties experience a slightly larger increase in Pax events than Q3 and Q4 counties, whereas for RCP 8.5 differences in Pax events are muted. Figures 6A and 6C show that northern counties, such as Orleans in Vermont (RCP 4.5 ¼ 0.80, RCP 8.5 ¼ 0.55) and Clinton in New York (RCP 4.5 ¼ 0.48, RCP 8.5 ¼ 0.53), will experience a greater increase in Pax events than southern counties. These increases in Pax events, however, largely do not affect the most vulnerable counties in the Northeast, which are concentrated in the south and west of the domain.

Annual minimum two-week summer precipitation (SPan) is insignificantly reduced across the Northeast

Figure 8. Difference between future (E2060, P2060) median global climate model and historical (E1990, P2010) number of extreme precipitation person-events per year. Counties with greater than 250,000 people are shaded gray, and counties in the 2060 lowest median income quartile are outlined in red. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

on average, with little difference between RCPs (Table 2). Consistent with the small average decrease in the Northeast, most counties experience unchanged or slightly reduced SPan events. A limited set of counties, however, most notably clustered in West Virginia and central New York, are projected to experience more SPan events (Figures 6B, 6D). Although these two regions do contain some vulnerable counties, the increase in SPan events is modest. We note that our focus on meteorological drought (based on precipitation) likely underestimates the extent of increased drought as it does not account for enhanced evapotranspiration due to higher temperatures.

## Extreme Person-Event Changes

Figures 7 and 8 show the future median GCM climate (2046 -2075) and population (2060) extreme person-events per year for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 relative

Table 3. Number of extreme person-events for the historical scenario, and median global climate model (GCM) number of extreme person-events for four future scenarios, per year per county

|       | Scenario            | Income Q1   | Income Q2   | Income Q3   | Income Q4   | Average    |
|-------|---------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|------------|
| Tx ax | E1990, P2010        | 1.03E þ 05  | 7.71E þ 04  | 6.46E þ 04  | 4.09E þ 04  | 7.11E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 9.94E þ 05              | 7.84E þ 05              | 6.89E þ 05              | 4.71E þ 05              | 7.32E þ 05             |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 1.99E þ 06              | 1.62E þ 06              | 1.44E þ 06              | 9.55E þ 05              | 1.50E þ 06             |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 9.58E þ 05              | 7.26E þ 05              | 3.52E þ 05              | 5.73E þ 05              | 6.49E þ 05             |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 1.90E þ 06              | 1.49E þ 06              | 7.30E þ 05              | 1.20E þ 06              | 1.33E þ 06             |
| Tn an | E1990, P2010        | 1.03E þ 05  | 7.71E þ 04  | 6.46E þ 04  | 4.09E þ 04  | 7.11E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 2.65E þ 04              | 1.64E þ 04              | 1.59E þ 04              | 1.32E þ 04              | 1.79E þ 04             |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 1.86E þ 04              | 1.02E þ 04              | 9.74E þ 03              | 9.53E þ 03              | 1.20E þ 04             |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 2.75E þ 04              | 1.62E þ 04              | 7.85E þ 03              | 1.39E þ 04              | 1.63E þ 04             |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 2.07E þ 04              | 9.74E þ 03              | 5.24E þ 03              | 8.07E þ 03              | 1.09E þ 04             |
| P ax  | E1990, P2010        | 1.03E þ 05  | 7.71E þ 04  | 6.46E þ 04  | 4.09E þ 04  | 7.11E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 1.25E þ 05              | 9.42E þ 04              | 7.79E þ 04              | 4.67E þ 04  | 8.57E þ 04             |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 1.18E þ 05  | 8.76E þ 04  | 7.48E þ 04  | 4.55E þ 04  | 8.12E þ 04             |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 1.23E þ 05              | 8.78E þ 04  | 4.00E þ 04              | 6.36E þ 04  | 7.83E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 1.16E þ 05              | 8.20E þ 04  | 3.89E þ 04              | 5.93E þ 04  | 7.38E þ 04 |
| SP an | E1990, P2010        | 1.03E þ 05  | 7.71E þ 04  | 6.46E þ 04  | 4.09E þ 04  | 7.11E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP45 | 9.40E þ 04  | 7.09E þ 04  | 5.91E þ 04  | 3.78E þ 04  | 6.52E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2010, RCP85 | 9.45E þ 04  | 7.17E þ 04  | 5.99E þ 04  | 3.88E þ 04  | 6.60E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP45 | 9.21E þ 04  | 6.66E þ 04  | 2.99E þ 04  | 4.93E þ 04  | 5.92E þ 04 |
|       | E2060, P2060, RCP85 | 9.22E þ 04  | 6.74E þ 04  | 3.01E þ 04  | 5.06E þ 04  | 5.98E þ 04 |

Note:  Change is significant at p &lt; 0.0026.

to historical climate (1976 -2005) and population (2010). As the extreme event occurrence for all metrics in the historical period is by definition one event per year, the baseline occurrence of personevents is the historical population (Figure 4A). Whereas the earlier analysis focuses on event changes, or the extreme events that each individual in a county would experience in 2060, this section emphasizes the most vulnerable areas inclusive of the number of people being affected in each county.

Extreme heat impacts are dramatic, increasing the median GCM number of Txax person-events averaged over the Northeast by approximately 578,000 for RCP 4.5 and 1.26 million for RCP 8.5 (Table 3). These numbers, like all changes in person-events averaged over the Northeast, include the impact of a 9 percent region-wide rural population decline (Table 1). Spatially, Txax person-events increase by more than 5 million in the most populous counties under RCP 8.5 (Figure 7C). The distribution of Txax person-event change is dominated by population. For example, in West Virginia, counties experience some of the largest changes in Txax events, but because the state is so sparsely populated, changes in Txax person-events are relatively low. In contrast, there are counties on the border of Pennsylvania and Maryland that have a relatively low occurrence of future Txax events, but the large populations highlight the importance of these counties in terms of Txax person-events. The two vulnerable counties that emerge with large increases in Txax personevents due to both large populations and large increases in Txax events are Centre County (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼ 2.73E þ 06, RCP 8.5 ¼ 5.74E þ 06) in Pennsylvania, home to Pennsylvania State University, and Oneida County (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼ 2.88E þ 06, RCP 8.5 ¼ 6.90E þ 06) in New York, which includes the cities of Rome and Utica.

The number of people affected by the historical once-per-year extreme cold event are reduced throughout the Northeast, on average by 55,000 and 60,000 person-events for RCPs 4.5 and 8.5, respectively. By definition, the maximum reduction in Tnan events is 1, such that the maximum reduction in Tnan person-events is the county population. Broadly, Tnan events decrease more with increasing latitude, driving a similar gradient in Tnan personevent reductions -smaller in the southern Northeast and larger in the northern Northeast. This gradient is punctuated by counties with some combination of relatively large populations, large changes in Tnan events, and increasing population (Figure 7D). Counties with particularly large changes in Tnan person-events generally benefit most (e.g., reduced

Table 4. Contribution of population to future extreme person-events

|       | Scenario   | Income Q1 (%)   | Income Q2 (%)   | Income Q3 (%)   | Income Q4 (%)   | Average (%)   |
|-------|------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|-----------------|---------------|
| Tx ax | RCP45      | - 4             | - 7             | - 49            | 22              | - 11          |
|       | RCP85      | - 4             | - 8             | - 49            | 26              | - 12          |
| Tn an | RCP45      | 4               | - 2             | - 51            | 5               | - 9           |
|       | RCP85      | 11              | - 5             | - 46            | - 15            | - 9           |
| P ax  | RCP45      | - 1             | - 7             | - 49            | 36              | - 9           |
|       | RCP85      | - 2             | - 6             | - 48            | 30              | - 9           |
| SP an | RCP45      | - 2             | - 6             | - 49            | 30              | - 9           |
| SP an | RCP85      | - 2             | - 6             | - 50            | 30              | - 9           |

human injury and mortality, heating costs, and infrastructure damage) and include Oneida County (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼  1.60E þ 05, RCP 8.5 ¼  2.11E þ 05) in New York, which was vulnerable based on Txax changes; Saratoga County (RCP 4.5 ¼  1.86E þ 05, RCP 8.5 ¼  2.09E þ 05) in New York, which contains several suburbs of Albany; and York County (RCP 4.5 ¼  1.72E þ 05, RCP 8.5 ¼  1.88E þ 05) in Maine, which is a coastal county close to Portland.

Averaged across the Northeast, extreme high precipitation (Pax) person-events increase by 7,000 for RCP 4.5 and 3,000 for RCP 8.5; however, the change is not significant. The reduction in Pax under a higher greenhouse gas emissions scenario is counterintuitive but consistent with the change in Pax events as described earlier. Unlike some scenarios and higher median income quartiles, Pax changes for both RCPs are insignificant in Q4 counties under future population (2060) and vulnerability (2060). Increases in P ax person-events are especially sensitive to population changes. Several counties that are expected to have rapid population growth in Maryland, Delaware, and eastern Pennsylvania emerge as regions of maximum Pax person-event increases (Figures 8A, 8C). Like Pax event changes, Pax person-events are generally higher in the northern part of the Northeast. There are some reductions in Pax person-events, most notably in southwestern Pennsylvania, primarily driven by population reductions.

Although the decreases in two-week extreme low precipitation (SPan) person-events are larger than the increase in Pax person-events averaged across the Northeast, 12,000 for RCP 4.5 and 11,000 for RCP 8.5, they are also insignificant. Most counties in the Northeast experience a small reduction in SPan person-events; however, for some areas, including

Figure 9. Sensitivity of future (2046 -2075) extreme events per year to global climate model for RCP 8.5 averaged across all Northeast counties with less than 250,000 people. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Centre County (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼ 1.08E þ 05, RCP 8.5 ¼ 1.03E þ 05) in Pennsylvania, Oneida County (Q4; RCP 4.5 ¼ 7.08E þ 04, RCP 8.5 ¼ 9.64E þ 04) in New York, and parts of Maryland, Delaware, and eastern Pennsylvania, population growth exacerbates modest increases or outpaces reductions in SPan events, resulting in enhanced SPan person-events.

Changes in extreme person-events can be driven by changes in extreme events, populations, and, most often, both. Table 4 shows the contribution of population to future extreme person-events by dividing the difference between person-event projections with population change (e.g., E2060, P2060, RCP85) and without population change (e.g., E2060, P2010, RCP85) by the number of future person-events without population change (e.g., E2060,

P2010, RCP85). This effectively yields the percentage increase or decrease in person-events resulting from the population projection (i.e., using 2060 instead of 2010).

Averaged across the rural Northeast, population negatively contributes to extreme person-events on average, driven by a projected decline in rural Northeast county populations of 9 percent (Table 1). Within the median income quartiles, Q3 emerges as a population that will be substantially reduced (49 percent), whereas populations in the most vulnerable counties (Q4) will grow by 30 percent (Table 1). The inconsistent effect of population on Q4 Tnan person-events, less than 30 percent for RCP 4.5 and negative for RCP 8.5, reflects a shift of Q4 counties northward, where the reductions in Tnan events are larger. In the case of RCP 8.5, the impact of this shift is actually greater than the increase in population, causing a net negative contribution to Tnan personevents. Smaller differences in the impact of population across variables and RCPs are due to heterogeneous changes in extreme events, movement of counties between income quartiles, and changing numbers of counties in each quartile. For example, Northeast average Txax person-events are reduced by 12 percent for RCP 8.5, more than the population decrease of 9 percent. This suggests that population losses occur disproportionately in counties that are strongly affected by increasing Tx ax events.

## Climate Projection Uncertainty

For all figures, tables, and analyses presented here, we use median extreme event changes from the four GCM projections. Simulated extreme events averaged across all Northeast rural counties for each of the four models under RCP 8.5 are shown in Figure 9. All four models agree that there will be an increase in the number of Txax events by 2060, but the magnitude of the increase varies considerably from about four events per year (INM-CM4) to more than forty events per year (GFDL-CM3). The range of projections for the remaining three extreme indexes is substantially smaller, as highlighted by the scale on the right axis of Figure 9. All four models project that the number of Tnan events will decrease to below 0.5, or one event every two years, by 2060. Although there does not appear to be a large range in the projections, as the ratio of future to historical Tnan events approaches zero, the frequency of Tnan events decreases dramatically. For IPSL-CM5A and

MIROC-ESM-CHEM, the historical once-per-year extreme cold event becomes a one-in-four-year and one-in-ten-year event, respectively, by 2046 to 2075. There is a general consensus among the models that the number of SPan events will remain relatively constant into the future. Future changes in Pax events, however, depend on the GCM being considered. Two of the four models (GFDL-CM3 and MIROC-ESM-CHEM) predict that Pax events will increase by 2060, whereas the remaining two predict little to no change.

## Conclusions

Future climate change impacts on humans will be determined by interactions between evolving climate and socioeconomic systems. Averaged across the Northeast, we find significant increases in future (2046 -2065) extreme heat and precipitation events and decreases in extreme cold events, relative to the historical period (1976 -2005). For RCPs 4.5 and 8.5, respectively, Tx ax events increase about ten and twenty times, Tnan events decrease by a factor of approximately four and five, and Pax events increase around 20 percent and 15 percent. Vulnerable counties, defined as those in the lowest income quartile (Q4), experience a slightly larger increase in Txax events and slightly smaller decrease in Tnan events than the Northeast average. Population in the rural Northeast declines by 9 percent overall by 2060 but, in contrast, Q4 county populations grow by 30 percent. This population growth contributes to significant increases in Txax person-events but is not large enough to reverse a significant decrease in Tnan person-events. Extreme two-week drought events and person-events decrease insignificantly. Projections of Txax events are most sensitive to choice of GCM, followed by Tnan events. GCMs disagree on the change in Pax events, with two GCMs predicting little or no change and two GCMs predicting a 25 and 75 percent increase. SPan event projections are relatively insensitive to GCM.

Our projections suggest that climate change adaptation strategies in the rural Northeast should emphasize developing resilience to heat waves, such as increasing access to public spaces with air conditioning and improving health care responses to emergencies initiated or exacerbated by heat. This is especially important in vulnerable counties, which will be disproportionately affected by increasing Tx ax

events and have growing populations. Reduced Tnan events could present an opportunity to redirect resources from public assistance focused on heating to public assistance focused on cooling. Although changes in Pax person-events were significant for only some median income quartiles and scenarios, heavy precipitation events remain an important hazard in the Northeast and have increased dramatically over recent decades. Further, there is significant disagreement about future Pax among the GCMs used in this study. Future research could explore a larger ensemble of GCMs and incorporate downscaling to better understand changes in heavy precipitation.

## Acknowledgments

We acknowledge the World Climate Research Programme ' s Working Group on Coupled Modelling, which is responsible for CMIP, and we thank the climate modeling groups for producing and making available their model output. For CMIP, the U.S. Department of Energy ' s Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison provides coordinating support and led development of software infrastructure in partnership with the Global Organization for Earth System Science Portals. Finally, we thank our editor and reviewers for their thoughtful feedback.

## Funding

This work was supported by the Vermont Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (NSF Awards EPS-1101317 and OIA 1556770) and the Dartmouth College Women in Science Project.

## ORCID

Jonathan M. Winter http://orcid.org/0000-0003- 1261-4774

Trevor F. Partridge http://orcid.org/0000-0003- 1589-4783

Jonathan W. Chipman http://orcid.org/0000- 0003-4629-5273

## References

- Arnell, N. W., and N. S. Reynard. 1996. The effects of climate change due to global warming on river flows
- in Great Britain. Journal of Hydrology 183 (3 -4):397 -424.
- Asseng, S., F. Ewert, C. Rosenzweig, J. W. Jones, J. L. Hatfield, A. C. Ruane, K. J. Boote, et al. 2013. Uncertainty in simulating wheat yields under climate change. Nature Climate Change 3 (9):827 -32.
- Bell, M. M. 1989. Did New England go downhill? Geographical Review 79 (4):450 -66.
- Brown, D. G., K. M. Johnson, T. R. Loveland, and D. M. Theobald. 2005. Rural land-use trends in the conterminous United States, 1950 -2000. Ecological Applications 15 (6):1851 -63.
- Burakowski, E. A., C. P. Wake, B. Braswell, and D. P. Brown. 2008. Trends in wintertime climate in the northeastern United States: 1965 -2005. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 113 (D20):D20114.
- Clark, J. S., L. Iverson, C. W. Woodall, C. D. Allen, D. M. Bell, D. C. Bragg, A. W. D'Amato, et al. 2016. The impacts of increasing drought on forest dynamics, structure, and biodiversity in the United States. Global Change Biology 22 (7):2329 -52.
- Coffel, E., and R. Horton. 2015. Climate change and the impact of extreme temperatures on aviation. Weather, Climate, and Society 7 (1):94 -102.
- Dai, A. 2013. Increasing drought under global warming in observations and models. Nature Climate Change 3 (1):52 -58.
- Donat, M. G., L. V. Alexander, H. Yang, I. Durre, R. Vose, R. J. H. Dunn, K. M. Willett, et al. 2013. Updated analyses of temperature and precipitation extreme indices since the beginning of the twentieth century: The HadEX2 dataset. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 118 (5):2098 -2118.
- Edwards, G. A. S., and H. Bulkeley. 2017. Urban political ecologies of housing and climate change: The ' coolest block ' contest in Philadelphia. Urban Studies 54 (5):1126 -41.
- Elsner, M. M., S. Gangopadhyay, T. Pruitt, L. D. Brekke, N. Mizukami, and M. P. Clark. 2014. How does the choice of distributed meteorological data affect hydrologic model calibration and streamflow simulations? Journal of Hydrometeorology 15 (4):1384 -1403.
- Frank, M. 2011. Water and steam: How industrial power shaped the New England landscape. In A landscape history of New England , ed. B. A. Harrison and R. W. Judd, 269 -284. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- Frei, A., K. E. Kunkel, and A. Matonse. 2015. The seasonal nature of extreme hydrological events in the northeastern United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 16 (5):2065 -85.
- Frich, P., L. V. Alexander, P. Della-Marta, B. Gleason, M. Haylock, A. M. G. K. Tank, and T. Peterson. 2002. Observed coherent changes in climate extremes during the second half of the twentieth century. Climate Research 19:193 -212.
- Gibbons, J. D., and S. Chakraborti. 2011. Nonparametric statistical inference. In International encyclopedia of statistical science , ed. M. Lovric, 977 -79. Berlin: Springer.
- Glasgow, N., and D. L. Brown. 2012. Rural ageing in the United States: Trends and contexts. Journal of Rural Studies 28 (4):422 -31.

- Glibert, P. M., J. Icarus Allen, Y. Artioli, A. Beusen, L. Bouwman, J. Harle, R. Holmes, and J. Holt. 2014. Vulnerability of coastal ecosystems to changes in harmful algal bloom distribution in response to climate change: Projections based on model analysis. Global Change Biology 20 (12):3845 -58.
- Goldthwait, J. W. 1927. A town that has gone downhill. Geographical Review 17 (4):527 -52.
- Guilbert, J., B. Beckage, J. M. Winter, R. M. Horton, T. Perkins, and A. Bomblies. 2014. Impacts of projected climate change over the Lake Champlain basin in Vermont. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 53 (8):1861 -75.
- Hales, D., W. Hohenstein, M. D. Bidwell, C. Landry, D. McGranahan, J. Molnar, L. W. Morton, M. Vasquez, and J. Jadin. 2014. Rural communities. In Climate change impacts in the United States: The third national climate assessment , ed. J. M. Melillo, T. C. Richmond, and G. W. Yohe, 333 -49. Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
- Hauer, M. E., J. M. Evans, and D. R. Mishra. 2016. Millions projected to be at risk from sea-level rise in the continental United States. Nature Climate Change 6 (7):691 -95.
- Hayhoe, K., C. P. Wake, T. G. Huntington, L. Luo, M. D. Schwartz, J. Sheffield, E. Wood, et al. 2007. Past and future changes in climate and hydrological indicators in the U.S. Northeast. Climate Dynamics 28 (4):381 -407.
- Hoerling, M., J. Eischeid, J. Perlwitz, X.-W. Quan, K. Wolter, and L. Cheng. 2016. Characterizing recent trends in U.S. heavy precipitation. Journal of Climate 29 (7):2313 -32.
- Hollander, M., and D. A. Wolfe. 1999. Nonparametric statistical methods . 2nd ed. New York: WileyInterscience.
- Horton, R. M., E. D. Coffel, J. M. Winter, and D. A. Bader. 2015. Projected changes in extreme temperature events based on the NARCCAP model suite. Geophysical Research Letters 42 (18):7722 -31.
- Horton, R. M., C. Rosenzweig, V. Gornitz, D. Bader, and M. O'Grady. 2010. Climate risk information: Climate change scenarios and implications for NYC infrastructure: New York City panel on climate change. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1196:147 -228.
- Hsiang, S., R. Kopp, A. Jina, J. Rising, M. Delgado, S. Mohan, D. J. Rasmussen, et al. 2017. Estimating economic damage from climate change in the United States. Science 356 (6345):1362 -69.
- Huang, H., J. M. Winter, E. C. Osterberg, R. M. Horton, and B. Beckage. 2017. Total and extreme precipitation changes over the northeastern United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 18 (6):1783 -98.
- Huntington, T. G., A. D. Richardson, K. J. McGuire, and K. Hayhoe. 2009. Climate and hydrological changes in the northeastern United States: Recent trends and implications for forested and aquatic ecosystems. Canadian Journal of Forest Research 39 (2):199 -212.
- Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013. Summary for policymakers. In Climate change 2013: The physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the fifth assessment report of the

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , ed. T. F. Stocker, D. Qin, G. K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex, and P. M. Midgley, 1 -30. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

- ---. 2014. Summary for policymakers. In Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part A: Global and sectoral aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , ed. C. B. Field, V. R. Barros, D. J. Dokken, K. J. Mach, M. D. Mastrandrea, T. E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, et al., 1 -32. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Isaac, M., and D. P. van Vuuren. 2009. Modeling global residential sector energy demand for heating and air conditioning in the context of climate change. Energy Policy 37 (2):507 -21.
- Johnson, K. M., L. M. Field, and D. L. Poston. 2015. More deaths than births: Subnational natural decrease in Europe and the United States. Population and Development Review 41 (4):651 -80.
- Kalkstein, L. S., and J. S. Greene. 1997. An evaluation of climate/mortality relationships in large U.S. cities and the possible impacts of a climate change. Environmental Health Perspectives 105 (1):84 -93.
- Kapucu, N., C. V. Hawkins, and F. I. Rivera. 2013. Disaster resiliency: Interdisciplinary perspectives . London and New York: Routledge.
- Kc, S., and W. Lutz. 2017. The human core of the shared socioeconomic pathways: Population scenarios by age, sex and level of education for all countries to 2100. Global Environmental Change 42:181 -92.
- Kunkel, K. E., T. R. Karl, H. Brooks, J. Kossin, J. H. Lawrimore, D. Arndt, L. Bosart, et al. 2013. Monitoring and understanding trends in extreme storms: State of knowledge. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 94 (4):499 -514.
- Lee, W. C., L. Shen, P. J. Catalano, L. J. Mickley, and P. Koutrakis. 2017. Effects of future temperature change on PM2.5 infiltration in the greater Boston area. Atmospheric Environment 150:98 -105.
- Li, T., R. M. Horton, and P. L. Kinney. 2013. Projections of seasonal patterns in temperature-related deaths for Manhattan, New York. Nature Climate Change 3 (8):717 -21.
- Livneh, B., E. A. Rosenberg, C. Lin, B. Nijssen, V. Mishra, K. M. Andreadis, E. P. Maurer, and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2013. A long-term hydrologically based dataset of land surface fluxes and states for the conterminous United States: Update and extensions. Journal of Climate 26 (23):9384 -92.
- Marquardt Collow, A. B., M. G. Bosilovich, and R. D. Koster. 2016. Large-scale influences on summertime extreme precipitation in the northeastern United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 17 (12):3045 -61.
- Maurer, E. P., A. W. Wood, J. C. Adam, D. P. Lettenmaier, and B. Nijssen. 2002. A long-term hydrologically based dataset of land surface fluxes and states for the conterminous United States. Journal of Climate 15 (22):3237 -51.
- Meyer, M. D., A. Amekudzi, and J. P. O 0 Har. 2010. Transportation asset management systems and climate

change. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2160 (1):12 -20.

- Mockrin, M. H., S. I. Stewart, V. C. Radeloff, R. B. Hammer, and K. M. Johnson. 2013. Spatial and temporal residential density patterns from 1940 to 2000 in and around the Northern Forest of the northeastern United States. Population and Environment 34 (3):400 -419.
- Moftakhari, H. R., A. AghaKouchak, B. F. Sanders, D. L. Feldman, W. Sweet, R. A. Matthew, and A. Luke. 2015. Increased nuisance flooding along the coasts of the United States due to sea level rise: Past and future. Geophysical Research Letters 42 (22):9846 -52.
- Moss, R. H., J. A. Edmonds, K. A. Hibbard, M. R. Manning, S. K. Rose, D. P. van Vuuren, T. R. Carter, et al. 2010. The next generation of scenarios for climate change research and assessment. Nature 463 (7282):747 -56.
- National Weather Service. 2017. National hazard statistics. Accessed April 8, 2017. http://www.nws.noaa. gov/om/hazstats.shtml.
- Neumann, B., A. T. Vafeidis, J. Zimmermann, and R. J. Nicholls. 2015. Future coastal population growth and exposure to sea-level rise and coastal flooding -A global assessment. PLoS ONE 10 (3):e0118571.
- Ning, L., E. E. Riddle, and R. S. Bradley. 2015. Projected changes in climate extremes over the Northeastern United States. Journal of Climate 28 (8):3289 -3310.
- Otto, I. M., D. Reckien, C. P. O. Reyer, R. Marcus, V. Le Masson, L. Jones, A. Norton, and O. Serdeczny. 2017. Social vulnerability to climate change: A review of concepts and evidence. Regional Environmental Change 17 (6):1651 -62.
- Paterson, J. H. 1982. The North-Eastern United States: A new desert? Geography : Journal of the Geographical Association 67 (2):109 -12.
- Peterson, T. C., R. R. Heim, Jr., R. Hirsch, D. P. Kaiser, H. Brooks, N. S. Diffenbaugh, R. M. Dole, et al. 2013. Monitoring and understanding changes in heat waves, cold waves, flood, and droughts in the United States: State of knowledge. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 94 (6):821 -34.
- Prudhomme, C., N. Reynard, and S. Crooks. 2002. Downscaling of global climate models for flood frequency analysis: Where are we now? Hydrological Processes 16 (6):1137 -50.
- Rappaport, J. 2003. U.S. urban decline and growth, 1950 to 2000. Economic Review-Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 88 (3):15 -44.
- Rosenzweig, C., W. Solecki, A. T. DeGaetano, M. O ' Grady, S. Hassol, and P. Grabhorn. 2011. Responding to climate change in New York State: Synthesis report . Albany: New York State Energy Research and Development Authority.
- Saharia, M., P.-E. Kirstetter, H. Vergara, J. J. Gourley, Y. Hong, M. Giroud, M. Saharia, et al. 2017. Mapping flash flood severity in the United States. Journal of Hydrometeorology 18 (2):397 -411.
- Sallenger, A. H., K. S. Doran, and P. A. Howd. 2012. Hotspot of accelerated sea-level rise on the Atlantic coast of North America. Nature Climate Change 2 (12):884 -88.
- Sathaye, J. A., L. L. Dale, P. H. Larsen, G. A. Fitts, K. Koy, S. M. Lewis, and A. F. P. de Lucena. 2013. Estimating impacts of warming temperatures on California ' s electricity system. Global Environmental Change 23 (2):499 -511.
- Schoof, J. T., and S. M. Robeson. 2016. Projecting changes in regional temperature and precipitation extremes in the United States. Weather and Climate Extremes 11:28 -40.
- Sinha, E., A. M. Michalak, and V. Balaji. 2017. Eutrophication will increase during the 21st century as a result of precipitation changes. Science 357 (6349):405 -8.
- Smith, T. T., B. F. Zaitchik, and J. M. Gohlke. 2013. Heat waves in the United States: Definitions, patterns and trends. Climatic Change 118 (3 -4):811 -25.
- Taylor, K. E., R. J. Stouffer, and G. A. Meehl. 2012. An overview of CMIP5 and the experiment design. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 93 (4):485 -98.
- Thibeault, J. M., and A. Seth. 2014. Changing climate extremes in the northeast United States: Observations and projections from CMIP5. Climatic Change 127 (2):273 -87.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2012. 2010 Census urban and rural classification and urban area criteria . Suitland, MD: U.S. Bureau Geography. Accessed September 14, 2017. https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urbanrural-2010.html.
- ---. 2013. Small area income and poverty estimates: State and county estimates for 2010. Accessed September 14, 2017. https://www.census.gov/did/www/ saipe/data/statecounty/data/2010.html.
- ---. 2016. Population by poverty status by counties. Accessed September 14, 2017. https://www.census. gov/data/tables/time-series/dec/census-poverty.html.
- U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 2013. Integrated climate and land-use scenarios. Accessed October 18, 2017. https://www.epa.gov/iclus.
- Villarini, G., R. Goska, J. A. Smith, and G. A. Vecchi. 2014. North Atlantic tropical cyclones and U.S. flooding. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95 (9):1381 -88.
- Walsh, J., D. Wuebbles, K. Hayhoe, J. Kossin, K. Kunkel, G. Stephens, P. Thorne, R. Vose, et al. 2014. Our changing climate. In Climate change impacts in the United States: The third national climate assessment , ed. J. M. Melillo, T. C. Richmond, and G. W. Yohe, 19 -67. Washington, DC: U.S. Global Change Research Program.
- Westerling, A. L., and B. P. Bryant. 2008. Climate change and wildfire in California. Climatic Change 87 (Suppl. 1):231 -49.
- Westerling, A. L., H. G. Hidalgo, D. R. Cayan, and T. W. Swetnam. 2006. Warming and earlier spring increase in Western U.S. forest wildfire activity. Science 313 (5789):940 -43.
- Wilby, R. L., J. Troni, Y. Biot, L. Tedd, B. C. Hewitson, D. M. Smith, and R. T. Sutton. 2009. A review of climate risk information for adaptation and development planning. International Journal of Climatology 29 (9):1193 -1215.

- Wilks, D. S. 2016. ' The stippling shows statistically significant grid points ' : How research results are routinely overstated and overinterpreted, and what to do about it. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 97 (12):2263 -73.
- Wood, A. W., L. R. Leung, V. Sridhar, and D. P. Lettenmaier. 2004. Hydrologic implications of dynamical and statistical approaches to downscaling climate model outputs. Climatic Change 62 (1 -3):189 -216.
- Wu, J., Y. Zhou, Y. Gao, J. S. Fu, B. A. Johnson, C. Huang, Y. M. Kim, and Y. Liu. 2014. Estimation and uncertainty analysis of impacts of future heat waves on mortality in the Eastern United States. Environmental Health Perspectives 122 (1):10 -16.
- Zhou, Y., and W. K.-M. Lau. 2017. The relationships between the trends of mean and extreme precipitation. International Journal of Climatology 37 (10):3883 -94.

JONATHAN M. WINTER is Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755. E-mail: jwinter@dartmouth.edu. His

## Appendix

research interests include climate prediction and climate impacts on water resources and agriculture.

FIONA L. BOWEN was an undergraduate in the Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755. E-mail: fionabowen04@gmail.com. She graduated in 2018 and now works in management consulting.

TREVOR F. PARTRIDGE is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Earth Sciences at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755. E-mail: trevor.f.partridge.gr@dartmouth.edu. His research interests focus on climate dynamics and the effects of climate change on agriculture in the midwestern United States.

JONATHAN W. CHIPMAN is Director of the Citrin GIS/Applied Spatial Analysis Lab at Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH 03755, with adjunct faculty appointments in Geography, Earth Sciences, and Quantitative Social Sciences. E-mail: jonathan.w.chipman@dartmouth.edu. His research interests involve remote sensing, geographic information systems, spatial analysis, and geovisualization.

Table A.1. Complete list of acronyms used in this study

| Tx                    | Maximum temperature                                                                                                                                          |
|-----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Tn                    | Minimum temperature                                                                                                                                          |
| P                     | Daily precipitation                                                                                                                                          |
| CESM1.0               | National Center for Atmospheric Research Community Earth System Model                                                                                        |
| WRF                   | Weather Research and Forecasting                                                                                                                             |
| ICLUS                 | Integrated Climate and Land Use Scenarios program                                                                                                            |
| LI2013                | Gridded observations developed by Livneh et al. (2013)                                                                                                       |
| Coop                  | NOAA Cooperative Observer                                                                                                                                    |
| CMIP5                 | Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5                                                                                                                |
| IPCC AR5              | Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fifth Assessment Report                                                                                            |
| RCP                   | Representative concentration pathway                                                                                                                         |
| GCM                   | Global climate model                                                                                                                                         |
| MIROC-ESM-CHEM        | GCM developed by Atmosphere and Ocean Research Institute, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, National Institute for Environmental Studies |
| IPSL-CM5A-LR GFDL-CM3 | GCM developed by Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace GCM developed by Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory                                                        |
| INM-CM4               | GCM developed by Institute for Numerical Mathematics                                                                                                         |
| GISS-E2-R             | GCM developed by NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies                                                                                                    |
| Tx ax                 | Annual daily maximum temperature                                                                                                                             |
| Tn an                 | Annual daily minimum temperature                                                                                                                             |
| P ax                  | Annual maximum daily precipitation                                                                                                                           |
| SP an                 | Annual two-week summer (May - August) precipitation minimum                                                                                                  |
| SRES                  | Special Report on Emissions Scenarios                                                                                                                        |
| SSP                   | IPCC AR5 Shared Socioeconomic Pathways                                                                                                                       |
| OLS                   | Ordinary least squares                                                                                                                                       |
| Q4                    | Lowest median income quartile                                                                                                                                |
| Q1                    | Highest median income quartile                                                                                                                               |