## HUMAN RELATIONS AND PRIMARY HEALTH CARE DELIVERY IN RURAL NEPAL: THE CASE OF DEURALI*

## Nanda R. Shrestha

University of Wisconsin-Whitewater

A preliminary  analysis of the primary  health care  delivery component  of a small  rural  development  project  in Deuraii,  Nepal,  snggesh  that  personal  relations  between  project  personnel  and  their  target  population  (e.g., implementors' sincerity  and  commitment to service) can overcome many cultural, geographical, and  class-related social barricrs  to achieving project  objectives. The Deurali  medical  staff's ability  to combine their  technical  skills with sincerity,  hard work, and  commitment has made the Deurali project reasonably successful in meeting villagers' prlmary  health care needs. Key Words: primary health care, human relations, commitment, social and geographical barriers, rural development.

Nearly a billion people throughout the world are trapped in a vicious circle of poverty, malnutrition,  and  disease  that  saps  their  energy  and  generally  reduces  their  work capacity and impedes social development. Finding ways of breaking this circle so that these people  can extricate themselves from  their plight is  one of the  greatest  social challenges that has ever faced humanity.

-Halfdan Mahler, 1980 Director-General, World Health Organization (WHO)

This study examines the primary health care delivery component of  a small rural development project in Deurali, Nepal (Fig. 1). It focuses  on  human (personal)  relations between  project  staff  and  the  villagers  who  form  the  target  population. Its  basic argument is that implementors' sincerity and commitment to the welfare of  villagers improve the probability  of  accomplishing  project  objectives despite  many  cultural, geographical, and class-related social barriers. This policy-oriented study first provides a conceptual  overview  of  primary  health  care. The second section briefly  discusses the rural health care situation in Nepal, followed by a case study of health care delivery in Deurali, focusing on its human dimensions. The conclusion considers policy implications, that is, whether Deurali can serve  as a model for other rural areas of Nepal, as well as for other underdeveloped societies.

## Primary Health Care Delivery: A Conceptual Overview

Rural health care delivery is an important demographic  and medical issue. The 1978 International  Conference on Primary Health Care declared primary health care (PHC) as the key to attaining health care for all by the year 2000 (World Health Organization 1978). Basic  health care should be  'made  universally  accessible to  individuals and families  in  the  community  through  their  full  participation  and at  a  cost  that  the community and country could afford to maintain-regardless of  their particular stage of  development-in the spirit of  self-reliance and self-determination'  (Mahler 1980, vi).

The provision  of  PHC is a major population and development issue  facing  most Third World countries. This issue has attracted enormous attention, particularly from the proponents of rural  development and basic needs, because the delivery of  PHC

* I would like to thank Drs. Paul Kaplan, Badrl Kayastha, John  Patterson,  and the two PG referees for their insightful  comments on the earlier drafts.

services is markedly deficient in the rural areas of underdeveloped societies. National governments and international development agencies (including private voluntary organizations  such as CARE, Catholic Relief Services, and Save the Children) have formulated policies to deal with the problem (Gwatkin et al. 1980; World Bank 1975). PHC is viewed as an indispensable  component of  rural development which, since the early  1970s, has emerged as a dominant development paradigm  in underdeveloped societies (Mehta 1984).

Most strategies devised to provide health care services to rural  areas in underdeveloped societies are based on three assumptions: (1) many health problems are susceptible to primary types of  care that can be handled by paraprofessionals;  (2)  modern medical facilities are located mainly in large urban areas and therefore  are inaccessible to  rural  residents;  and  (3) the  economic  aspects  of  the demand for  medical  careincome, time, distance, and money-are critical deterrents to using medical services (Akin et al. 1986).  Distance represents actual costs in terms of travel expenses and lost time  and  may  be  a  barrier  to  obtaining  preventative care  (World Bank  1975, 36). Geographers have developed the concept of  a patient care "gradient"  to show how health  care  utilization  decreases  with  increasing distance  from  the  health  clinic (Sharpston  1972; Gesler  1984; Jones and Moon  1987). In a country like Nepal  characterized  by  rugged,  hilly  terrain,  distance  becomes  a  serious  hindrance. Besides distance, administrative and cultural factors  may  also impede effective health  care provision and use in underdeveloped countries. Of  particular  importance are social class  barriers. Most of  the economic benefits of  development projects accrue primarily to only a small segment of  the population that controls economic resources and the social system (Griffin 1974; Payer  1982). The situation is no different in the area  of health care. Miller (1986, 1034)  maintains that social and gender inequalities account for the ill health and the less than optimal use of  existing health services by the poor. Thus most  PHC delivery  projects  are likely  to  fail unless  the  existing  situation of social and gender inequality is corrected first.

Yet nobody  disputes the need to provide essential PHC services in rural areas of underdeveloped countries. From the development point of view, poor health severely hinders  maximum, productive utilization of both labor and natural resources. Tangible and sustained improvements  in people's health augment their productivity. They can also improve their attitude toward family planning in the long-run, through reduced infant mortality which relates to fertility behavior in many underdeveloped societies (Cain 1981; Cassen 1976; World Bank  1975).

What then can be done to overcome geographical, cultural, and social barriers, and consequently  to attain better health care in rural areas? The distance barrier may be overcome by setting up clinics in those locations which maximize accessibility. Cultural and  social barriers are  less  amenable  to a spatial solution.  Although  improvements in economic environments may overcome at least the worst aspects of  poor  health and other manifestations of  poverty, this generally laissez-faire position often reinforces existing class disparities (Myrdal 1957).  For example, Gwatkin and others (1980, 1)  state, "Conventional development efforts oriented toward overall economic growth have proven  usually slow in bringing about improvements in nutrition and health, as well as in fulfilling  other basic needs conventional development programs can be supplemented by .  .  . village-based  'trickle-up'  development strategies; consumeroriented agricultural production and distribution policies;  and direct  intervention efforts to deal with nutrition, health,  education, and other social problems."

In underdeveloped societies the policy of  state intervention has become common and popular (Shrestha 1987). External donor agencies have also intervened directly in health care by setting up clinics. In fact, most of  the financial assistance for health care projects generally  comes from outside agencies (Briscoe  1978;  Gwatkin et al. 1980).

Figure I. Gorkha district

<!-- image -->

Despite certain benefits of  direct intervention, serious questions have been raised about its efficacy.  Health and development policies formulated within the framework of rural development and basic needs often call for greater community participation. However,  such  policies  invariably  ignore the  formidable  difficulties posed  by  the redistribution of  power and resources  necessary  for  successful community  participation (Gwatkin et al. 1980; Miller 1986).  Effective community mobilization and participation become extremely difficult in class-stratified societies characterized by social and economic inequalities (Briscoe 1978;  Miller 1986).  Lasting improvements  in health and other socioeconomic conditions require structural transformations that are possible only when the lowest classes have access to the productive resources necessary for  participation  in community  projects  (Gwatkin et al.  1980, 2). Where  the social

structure and productive resources are controlled by an elite minority, social barriers hinder  effective  implementation of  health  care  and other development programs. Development projects, irrespective of  their intentions and goals, are often subverted and end up serving the dominant class interest.  Direct interventions in such societies, not surprisingly,  tend to benefit chiefly well-to-do villagers. Many rural development projects fail to serve the poor because the project staff  (who are generally  outsiders) first come into contact with village elites, and become closely aligned with them and their interests. The poor and underprivileged then become cynical and suspicious of both the staff and the project. The poor justifiably develop a belief that development projects and their implementors only help the rich,  and hence they tend to avoid both. As a result, the poor are rarely actively involved in  the  project; they are  alienated. Such an antipodal tendency between the project staff  and the large majority of  the target population only serves the dominant interest of  village elites.

A countervailing factor, however, is that of  human relations, namely the sincerity and commitment of  the program staff  to serve the intended population. This paper treats  human  relations as a  key  variable  because  of  its focus  on  the project  staffs positive personal  contacts or symbiotic relations with their target villagers. In such relations both parties  enjoy mutual respect  and trust,  and work  toward  a common goal. Short of  fundamental structural transformations, the human dimension is perhaps the only element capable of  meeting the basic needs of  those at the bottom of the socioeconomic strata.

The emphasis on interpersonal relations with the target population can overcome social barriers, avoid the project staffs dependency on village elites, gain the trust of the villagers, and actively involve them in the project. Once these goals are achieved, attaining project objectives of  reaching and involving the village population becomes easier. For example, in rural Bangladesh the quality and quantity of  contacts between public health and family planning workers and rural women played a major role in the decision to adopt contraceptives (Ahmed 1987,370). Human relations can also cut through geographical barriers when the project staff is committed to deliver services to those who need them, regardless of  where or who they are.

Despite  their  critical  role,  human  relations are  rarely  featured  in  development literature or injected  into program  formulation and implementation;  nor  are they considered in assessment of  project performances. This neglect generally stems from perceived  difficulty  in  quantifying the  human dimension. The  variable  of  project implementors'  dedication  thus becomes  mystified  and  ignored. The  interpersonal relations variable is critical, however,  and needs to be carefully investigated  in the context of  the project's effectiveness in reaching the poor.

## Rural Health Care in Nepal

The  only  comprehensive public  health  survey available  on  Nepal  is  the  Nepal Health Survey of  1965-66  (Banister and  Thapa  1981). It  provides  a fairly  detailed picture of  Nepal's  public health situation, focusing on both commonly observed diseases and their causes (Worth and Shah 1969).  Several diseases and chronic  infections such as goiter, gonorrhea  and syphilis, leprosy, tuberculosis, intestinal  parasite-related diarrhea and gastrointestinal disorders (among children), polio, cholera, and malaria were found to be quite prevalent throughout Nepal. All of  the surveyed villages were characterized by poor and contaminated water supplies, public defecation or lack of sanitary  latrines,  poor  ventilation,  and serious  rat and fly infestations  (Worth and Shah 1969). A decade later a government report noted that "Nepal  has made steady progress during the last three decades in raising the health standard of  the population.. .  . Through international cooperation, a malaria  eradication program  has successfully been implemented in the Terai area. Cholera and smallpox are no longer

TABLE 1 DISTRIBUTION OF HOSPITALS AND HOSPITAL BEDS IN NEPAL, JUNE 1971

|                               |       | Terrain distribution   | Terrain distribution   | Terrain distribution   | Regional distribution   | Regional distribution   | Regional distribution   | Regional distribution   |
|-------------------------------|-------|------------------------|------------------------|------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Hospitals and beds            | Nepal | Tarai                  | Hilla                  | Moun- tainb            | East                    | Central                 | West                    | Far West                |
| Hospitals with 525 beds       | 37    | 18                     | 17                     | 2                      | 8                       | 13                      | 10                      | 6                       |
| Hospitals with >25 beds       | 16    | 6                      | 10                     | 0                      | 2                       | 9                       | 4                       | 1                       |
| Total hospitals               | 53    | 24                     | 27                     | 2                      | 10                      | 22                      | 14                      | 7                       |
| Hospital beds                 | 1910  | 530                    | 1340                   | 40                     | 200                     | 1230                    | 347                     | 133                     |
| W distribution                | 100.0 | 27.7                   | 70.2                   | 2.1                    | 10.5                    | 64.4                    | 18.2                    | 7.0                     |
| Z of total population         | 100.0 | 36.6                   | 53.8                   | 9.6                    | 24.2                    | 33.5                    | 21.3                    | 21.0                    |
| Total population/hospital bed | 6050  | 7986                   | 4638                   | 27 709                 | 13988                   | 3208                    | 7100                    | 18250                   |

threatening epidemics.. . . Malnutrition,  measles, tuberculosis,  and to a major extent intestinal infection and water pollution are still forming a great hazard to the general health of  the population.  Strenuous efforts in curtailing  infectious diseases, such as vaccination campaigns and increasing medical personnel, are still badly needed. Number  of  persons per physician is as high as 40 000. Number of  hospitals and hospital beds is still far below the adequate level. The doctor /population ratio in Nepal is the lowest recorded in the ESCAP region"  (Nepal, Central Bureau of  Statistics 1977, 95).

From a geographical viewpoint the situation  is  even worse because  most of  the doctors and hospitals are concentrated  in urban areas and district  centers far from most rural areas where over 90%  of  Nepal's  population resides. In addition, hospitals are unevenly distributed among geographic regions and terrains (Table 1).  Realizing this uneven regional distribution of  limited hospitals and doctors, "the  Nepal government has concluded that hospital-based medical care cannot adequately serve the needs of  Nepal's  scattered population. Small health centers have recently  been  set up, most of  them staffed by paramedical personnel, health aids, and other minimallytrained workers"  (Banister and Thapa 1981, 35).

Most of  these village-level  health posts and dispensaries are designed  to provide free  medical care. The vast  majority  of  them, however, barely  function because of problems with "inadequate  funding, unavailability  of  trained staff, chronically late salary payments, absenteeism, weak or nonexistent supervision, lack of transport, and severe shortages of  equipment, medicines,  and vaccines"  (Banister and Thapa 1981, 36; Vaidya 1979).  For example, villagers complain of  rude, non-caring paramedics who allegedly sell medicines which are supposed to be distributed free.

In order to meet rural  health care needs,  the government of  Nepal has begun to train  health  workers  to visit  people in their homes (Vaidya 1979). Various foreign agencies  have  provided  support for this policy, and even implemented their  own health care projects under the banner  of  rural development, such  as the Save the Children Federation (SCF) project in Deurali.

## Data and Methodology

The present study provides a preliminary analysis of a small-scale rural health care delivery project in Deurali, Nepal, that was launched by SCF in 1981. The data used here are extracted from  an unpublished study conducted during March 1984  (Shrestha and Kayastha  1984). Methods  included formal questionnaire interviews (Table 2), participant-observation  and informal  discussions with villagers,  and official records

TABLE 2 CONTENTS OF

## THE FORMAL QUESTIONNAIRE

The interview questionnaire contained 94 questions, classified into the following categories:

1. Personal and family-related information.
2. Landholding and land tenure status.
3. Farming practices  and farm output.
4. Rural development project-related  information, further divided as follows:
- a. Health care and family planning.
- b. Villagers' participation  in  various aspects and phases of  the  project  including  the decision-making process.
- c.  Villagers' perception of the project.
- d. Personal and communal benefits from the project.

Source. Shrestha and Kayastha 1984

of   the  Deurali health clinic on clinic  visits and disease types. For the formal interviews, a 10%  sample of  78 household heads was selected utilizing a stratified design.

Participant-observation is the principal technique to evaluate the dynamics of human relations in meeting project objectives. The participant-observation technique is widely used by ethnographers and cultural anthropologists.  When carefully utilized, it is more suitable for microscale studies and provides better understanding of  household and local level realities than many sophisticated models that attempt to fit reality into a predesigned framework. Moreover, if  planners and policy makers truly want to attain the stated goals of development projects, they need a clear understanding of  project implementation.  After all, the implementation level is where most projects succeed or fail.

The difficulty of  using the participant-observation  method is that no firm criteria exist  on  which  to  base  one's  evaluation  of  human  relations.  Often  the  evaluation appears to be subjective because the criteria are based on the researcher's assessment of  what ought to be emphasized during field research. In order to provide a logical basis for observations, the following  criteria were used to evaluate health care workers' relations to Deurali villagers: availability and willingness to help villagers; provision of  home  visits and follow-up  services; persistent  attempts to promote  good  health habits and preventative measures for sustained improvements  in health; and, respectful treatment of  villagers. These criteria were assessed mainly by intensive  and careful personal observations over a period of one month. If  the above criteria were observed to be  affirmative, the relationship between health personnel and their client population was evaluated as being positive and effective.

## A Socioeconomic Profile of Deurali

Deurali is a village panchayaf, a political geographic unit that is roughly equivalent to a county in the United States. It is located in the southwestern  section of the Gorkha district (Fig. 1).  In 1984 Deurali had a total population of  4184 people: 2079 males and 2105  females.  The  average  family  size  was  almost  six  persons.  Economically,  the panchayaf, like other rural  areas  in Nepal,  depends predominantly on subsistence farming. Growing population and stagnant agriculture in the hill region  have promoted outmigration. Migrant  family members often provide supplemental income, without which the household economy of  the hills could be in jeopardy  (Shrestha 1982, 1985).  In this sense Deurali is no different  from other hill areas. Many outmigrants go to construction  sites and cities within Nepal looking for jobs during the agricultural slack season (November-February). A large number also go to India seeking long-term employment opportunities.

Very few people have received even a high school education. Nonetheless, nearly

TABLE 3 MONTHLY CLINIC VISITS, 1983

| Months                                                                       |   Number of visits |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------|
| January February March April May June July August September October November |                156 |
|                                                                              |                242 |
|                                                                              |                374 |
|                                                                              |                460 |
|                                                                              |                646 |
|                                                                              |                600 |
|                                                                              |                296 |
|                                                                              |                248 |
|                                                                              |                356 |
|                                                                              |                264 |
|                                                                              |                259 |
| December                                                                     |                203 |
| Total                                                                        |               4103 |

Source: The Deurali Clinic 1984

30% of  them can read and write. Upper caste members (e.g., Brahmins, Chhetris, and Newars) are more  educated  in terms  of  both  numbers and educational  attainment than the lower  caste groups (e.g., Damais, Kamis, and Sunars). Primary  education (grades 1 to 5 ) is  free, but not many elementary schools exist in the panchayaf,  and the existing ones are not easily accessible to all households because of  distance and difficult topography.  There is only one high school, which is neither equipped nor readily  accessible to serve all Deurali households.  Even if  it were accessible (not to mention  affordable)  many  poor  families would  not  send  their  children  to  school because of  labor needs (Shrestha and Kayastha 1984).

## Primary Health Care Delivery in Deurali

From the very outset, Save the Children has emphasized health care as a top priority of  its  rural  development project  in  Deurali.  It  has  established  a  health  clinic  and incorporated both the curative and preventive approaches in its health care delivery system, with the assumption that a curative approach alone is not sufficient to attain the goal of sustained improvements  in health care without complementary preventive measures (World Bank 1975).

## Curative Approach and Measures

The health  clinic forms the nucleus  of  the curative approach. Its central location assures maximum accessibility. It is staffed by Nepali health workers: one health officer (paramedic), one nurse, and one locally trained health motivator. Although the clinic is not equipped to provide any major medical services, it can handle common community health problems and is suitable for Deurali's absorptive capacity. The clinicoperated drug store carries medicines for most frequently observed diseases. The clinic adds a 10%  transportation surcharge to the actual wholesale cost of  medicines, yet the price is substantially lower than the regular market price. This pricing policy appears justified. The fact that villagers have to pay for the medicine reduces their dependency on handouts and safeguards the system from abuse, while allowing the drug store to be self-supporting.

In order to obtain medical services at the clinic, the patient has to pay an initial, one-time registration fee of  one rupee (approximately five cents). There is no charge for subsequent visits. According to the clinic records, there were 4103 patient visits in 1983.  On average, there were 342 visits per month, but the numbers varied widely,

TABLE 4 COMMON DISEASES AND THEIR REPORTED INCIDENCES, 1983

| Diseases                     |   Number of cases |   Percentage |
|------------------------------|-------------------|--------------|
| Gastroenteritis              |               389 |           32 |
| Respiratory tract infections |               270 |           22 |
| Skin diseases                |               157 |           13 |
| Ear, nose & throat problems  |               113 |            9 |
| Prenatal cases               |                44 |            4 |
| Emergency cases              |                35 |            3 |
| Infectious diseases          |                16 |            1 |
| Gonorrhea                    |                14 |            1 |
| Accidental injuries          |                14 |            1 |
| Urinary tract infections     |                13 |            1 |
| Others                       |               156 |           13 |
| Total                        |              1221 |          100 |

Source: The Deurali Clinic 1984

from 156 in January to 646 in May (Table 3). Gastroenteritis (diarrhea and dysentery) was the major health problem, and respiratory tract infections were the second most common complaint (Table 4).

Interviews with 78 sample household heads revealed that over 50%  of  households had at least one ill member. One quarter of  household heads with illness  in the family preferred to apply local herbal medicines and/or to visit a nearby shaman, whereas almost 75%  took their sick family members to the health clinic for treatment.

In addition to treating patients  at the clinic, the medical staff visits a different village each Friday on a rotational basis. The goal of  this outreach  service, an integral component  of  Deurali's  health  care  system,  is  to  serve  the medical  needs  of  those  in relatively remote places who cannot visit the main clinic because of  the distance or lack of  time and energy. The project also operates a mobile mini-clinic in designated areas on a monthly basis.

## Preventive Approach and Measures

The  clinic  also  stresses various  preventive  measures  to  complement its curative approach. The clinic promotes preventive measures through repeated personal contacts,  home  visits,  demonstrations,  and  persistence,  making the  target  population aware of  the importance of such measures to maintenance of  good health. The emphasis is on human relations and personal contacts as an effective and inexpensive way to convince villagers to improve their health habits.

Community Health Leaders and Female Health Volunteers. One of  the principal features  of  the preventive approach  is  the  recruitment of  local  community  health leaders (CHL) and female health volunteers (FHV). The villages are grouped into 13 CHL units, served by  11 CHLs and 11 FHVs.  These volunteers periodically receive training from the Deurali medical staff and government personnel on various aspects of  primary  health care and preventive measures. The training is purposefully kept simple and fundamental.

During the training period  CHLs and FHVs are given minimum allowances  to compensate for the loss of  their work  and incomes.  The volunteers' main job is to educate their fellow villagers on a continuing basis about preventive measures such as sanitation, nutrition, family planning, and latrine construction. They are also authorized and instructed  to administer certain minor drugs. In addition, the Deurali project has emphasized the use of  local sudenis (female birth attendants or midwives)

to help expectant mothers during delivery. These sudenis are given certain medical training to enhance their traditional knowledge about birth and delivery.  With their help, the clinic offers prenatal check-up  services to pregnant women. The aim is to minimize the risk of complication associated with pregnancy and delivery.  Currently, there are 40 trained sudenis, 13 of  whom are FHVs.

Female Health Motivator. Another important aspect of  the Deurali clinic's emphasis on the importance of  human relations and personal contacts is the appointment of a Female Health Motivator,  who is a paid member of  the medical staff. Her primary duty is to reinforce the preventive measures taught by CHLs and FHVs in a complementary fashion. She visits ail villages on a rotational basis for five days per week, making careful observations of each household concerning  sanitary conditions, latrine situations, nutrition, and other  health  care  problems.  If  she observes any sanitary negligence, she confers with the family, reiterating the advantage of  sanitation. She also  regularly  disseminates  family  planning  information  and materials  to  eligible couples. Field  observations clearly  indicate  that she carries out her responsibilities with conviction. According  to informal conversations with villagers, a few families (approximately 15%)  viewed her regular visits as hindering their household work and even as an imposition on their lives, but the majority of  families (over 80%)  seemed to truly appreciate her assistance in the area of family sanitation.  Their positive reaction suggests that this particular approach to preventive health care is both practical and effective.

Nutrition and Malnutrition. The clinic staff  pays special attention to the adequacy of  nutrition and the extent of  malnutrition among children under five years of  age. The degree of  malnutrition is paramount in the overall growth and development of children and their susceptibility to various diseases. In order to determine the level of  malnutrition  and  advise parents  concerning  the care of their malnourished children, the female health motivator  and others (frequently the staff  nurse) regularly  take weight and arm tape measurements of children between the ages of one and five. The 1983 data retained at the clinic showed that 10%  of  the children (population of  357) suffered from severe malnourishment and 39% from some nutritional deficiencies.

According to the medical staff, malnutrition in Deurali is directly related either to the family's poor socioeconomic condition or to parents' attitude and misunderstanding of  their children's  nutritional requirements for healthy growth. Sample respondents were asked about the need of supplementary  food for breast-fed babies (virtually every baby is breast-fed). The majority (68%)  thought it was needed, but 66% of  this majority said it was essential only after the baby reached the age of six months. Such a response seems to reflect the common practice in Nepal of  not giving solid food to babies until they are five to six months old (this practice  is, however,  found to be medically sound). While the answer to malnutrition caused by poor socioeconomic conditions is complicated and hard to resolve, the malnutrition related to attitude and misunderstanding was being handled through repeated education.

Immunization of Children. There is no doubt that proper immunization is one of the  most  effective preventive health care  measures;  it  also  helps to  reduce  infant mortality  (World Bank  1975). In  some parts  of  Nepal,  where the government has dispatched  a cadre of  trained health workers  to  provide immunization,  the infant mortality rate has been almost halved (World Development Forum 1985).  The Deurali medical staff contends  that infant death rates have been reduced noticeably there also. Immunization  is their top priority.  In their attempt to immunize Deurali children, the medical staff  collaborates with the concerned  government agencies. The survey found that a large majority (86%)  of  the respondents have had their children immunized.

Latrine Construction. In addition to the above preventive measures, the clinic staff

has campaigned  for the construction  of  latrines and against  using open fields and stream banks for defecation.  The majority of  the villagers surveyed are not, however, fond of this campaign. They prefer using open space to confined latrines because of expense and habit. The staff notes that the villagers' 'open-space-latrine habit' is one of  the main  causes of  air and water  contamination  in  Deurali and consequently  a cause of  many air- and water-borne  diseases. Despite villagers' common displeasure with  the idea  of  using  latrines,  the  medical  staffs persistence  seems to  be  slowly paying off  as 109 households had erected latrines by 1984.

Family  Planning Service.  The clinic is also deeply involved in family planning. It distributes  temporary family planning devices (e.g.,  pills, condoms, etc.)  free  of charge. Once a year the clinic, in cooperation with the Nepal  government's mobile family planning team,  runs an intensive camp  to promote permanent birth  control  (e.g., sterilization)  in Deurali. It mobilizes all of  its resources, sending volunteers to every eligible couple's house in the panchayat to coax them to come forward for vasectomy or sterilization.  This technique of  persistence and persuasion has resulted  in a fairly widespread adoption of  family planning in Deurali.

During a two-year  period  (1982-83),  160 of  Deurali's  households  (21%) adopted permanent birth control: 69 females and 91 males. In the long-run such achievements are expected not only to curtail Deurali's population growth rate, but also to improve both maternal  and child health.  Additionally, the probability o f   children having better educational and socioeconomic opportunities should be enhanced.

The main reason the Deurali clinic-sponsored family planning is successful lies in its  three-step approach. First, a month before the  government's mobile family planning team's scheduled visit to Deurali, the clinic staff  repeatedly visits every eligible couple and coaxes them to adopt family planning. Second, once the mobile team arrives in Deurali, the staff further intensifies its  activity, going to every eligible couple's house and asking them to come forward  for family planning. The family that adopts permanent birth control is given 100 rupees (about $5 U.S.) as an incentive. Finally, and very importantly, the clinic staff pays follow-up visits to these families to make sure that no complications have developed. This last step is crucial to gain villagers' trust in the program, to avoid negative publicity that may result from complications, and to make them realize that the clinic staff will be there should problems arise or should they need any medical help.

## What Makes the Deurali Health Care Project Work?

The above findings and observations clearly suggest that the Deurali medical staff has implemented a reliable and efficient health care delivery system that is adequate to  meet  the basic medical  needs of  Deurali  residents. This personal  observation  is corroborated by formal interviews with sample household heads. Eighty-six percent of  the sample viewed the project positively, and the remaining 14%  were indifferent. The overwhelming majority of  the sample (82%)  felt that they derived personal benefits from the project. The benefits accrued  fairly evenly across class and caste hierarchies. Of  the 40 respondents with landholdings of  less than ten ropanis (1.3 acres), 90% said they had derived benefits.  Seventy-four percent  of  those with holdings of more than ten ropanis said they had benefited. Within the caste hierarchy 84% of  the upper caste groups and 80% of  the lower caste groups were  beneficiaries  (Shrestha and Kayastha 1984).

What makes this project work while many others have generally faltered or been abused by village elites? As postulated above, the primary explanation for the Deurali clinic's apparent success lies in the project's  human dimension: the medical  staffs ability to blend their sincerity and commitment  to meeting Deurali's health care needs with their technical skills. The staffs emphasis on personal communication and their

sincerity and simplicity in dealing with villagers,  regardless of  their caste or class affiliations, are  unquestionable.  Field  observations indicate that this personal  commitment  backed by  action has neutralized both the cynicism and suspicion on the part  of  poor and lower caste villagers, and the opportunism on the part of  well-todo village elites. Without  the  firm  commitment,  consistently  demonstrated by  the project staff,  Deurali's elites would most likely have controlled the health care delivery process, thereby excluding a vast majority from enjoying any of  its benefits.

In order to provide institutional support for the project and to minimize its abuse by local elites, SCF formed a village  development committee constituting different village and group representatives  elected or selected by consensus. It also created a network of  local health care volunteers to serve their communities. These volunteers often promoted preventive measures critical for sustained improvements  in personal health and adopted various sanitary measures themselves. Such a procedure not only set an example, but actually helped to maximize villagers' trust in health workers and the project itself and to minimize the chances of  friction between villagers and outsiders.

The project's small-scale operation is also an undeniable contributor  to its effectiveness. Because it is small in terms of  both demographic and areal coverage, a large sum of  money is not required and is therefore not available for corruption and abuse of  funds, both of which could ultimately destroy a project. From a technical viewpoint the two-pronged  focus on curative and preventive measures  is practical  as well  as cost-effective.

## Conclusion

Two questions arise from this study,  and  both have policy implications. First, despite the achievements of  the Deurali project, a nagging question  remains as to its longterm viability. Will the health care delivery system carefully crafted by the SCF staff function as effectively once it is handed over to the village development committee, or will it be abused and subjected to corruption and control by  Deurali's  elites? At this time  members  of  the dominant class appear generally  restrained.  There  is  no guarantee that their class interests will not resurface after Save the Children departs, and that the underprivileged will  not  be  forced  to  succumb to the wishes  of  the privileged on whom they depend. If  this happens, class friction will probably result in the rapid evaporation of  the spirit of  mutually beneficial community cooperation that currently exists. If  the watchful presence of an external donor agency is required to  check  the  dominant class interest,  does  this not  reinforce  external  dependency which already plagues most underdeveloped societies and stunts their independent development  potential?  Furthermore,  how  long  can  an  external  agency  keep  the dominant class interest in check, especially  if  its own interests are closely aligned with those of  local elites? While answers to these questions are beyond the scope of the present analysis, they cannot be overlooked.

Second, can the model of a reasonably successful project such as the one in Deurali be transferred to other rural communities? This question is more than simply a matter of  curiosity; it has significant policy  implications for thousands of  other rural areas which also badly need such primary medical services.

As previously indicated, the Deurali project is small in every respect. According to Schumacher's (1975) dictum, its smallness and simplicity are indeed its beauty and strength. It is easily manageable with a small number of  technical staff and sustainable with  locally  available  resources. It is  also  suitable  for local  needs and absorptive capacity with little waste of  scarce financial resources. There is no need for the burdensome or wasteful infrastructure typical of  large-scale development projects. Thus its smallness in terms of  demographic and spatial coverage, as well as financial com-

mitment, is an attractive advantage. However, this very advantage of  the model may also prove to be its biggest limitation.

A small scale model such as Deurali does not cover a large number of  people and villages at one time. Successful transplantation to other rural areas of  Nepal and to other  underdeveloped  societies  therefore  demands a  large  pool  of  dedicated  and tireless staff. The process is destined to be slow and piecemeal, requiring a great deal of  patience and time. But time, patience, and dedication are not necessarily abundant among most instant development-minded policymakers and planners, not to mention the mass of  expectant recipients. The question of  the widespread applicability of  the Deurali model is further complicated by the fact that most politicians, planners, and policy-makers in underdeveloped countries such as Nepal  favor  grandiose projects because they are eye-catching and make their countries  look instantly  'modern.' Such projects may not be affordable and do not necessarily reflect sound development.

Yet the lesson of  the Deurali model may be that a small scale project is less wasteful, more suitable for the local needs and absorptive capacity, and highly adaptable to the local value system as well as local resources than are large projects. Maximum utilization  of  local resources  is imperative  for achievement of  self-sufficiency and selfreliance and for reduction of external dependency.  Small projects are more efficiently manageable than landmark projects which tend to gravitate toward large urban centers thus perpetuating the urban bias in national  development (Lipton 1977).  Small  projects can be distributed throughout the country, thus making  such  essential  services  as primary health care readily available to the vast majority of  rural residents.

## Literature Cited

- Ahmed, Bashir. 1987. Determinants of  contraceptive use in rural Bangladesh: The demand for children, supply of  children, and costs of  fertility regulation. Demography 24:361-73.
- Akin,  John S., C.  C. Griffin, D. K.  Guilkey, and 8. M. Popkin.  1986. The demand  for primary health  care services in the Bicol region of  the Philippines. Economic Development  and  Cultural -- -Change 33:755-82.
- Banister. ludith. and Shvam Thaua.  1981. The Population Dunamics of Nepal. Paper of  the East. I , . West Population Insti&lt;ute, No. 58. Honolulu: East-West eenter.
- (Particularly Oxfam)  Help in Bangladesh? Dacca: Oxfam. Briscoe,  J. 1978. Improving Health Cure Where Health Is Underdeveloped:  Do Foreign Voluntary  Agencies
- Bangladesh. Population and  Development Review 7:435-74. Cain, Mead. 1981.  Risk and insurance: Perspectives on fertility and agrarian change in India and
- Cassen, Robert. 1976. Population and development: A review. World Development 4:785-830.
- Gesler, Wilbert M.  1984. Health Care in Developing Countries. Resource Paper 84-1. Washington, DC: Association of  American Geographers.
- Griffin, Keith. 1974. The Political Economy of Agrarian Change. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Gwatkin, Davidson R., J.  R.  Wilcox, and J.  D. Wray. 1980. Can Health and  Nutrition Interventions Make a Difference? Washington, DC: Overseas Development Council.
- Jones, Kelvyn, and Graham Moon. 1987. Medical Geography: A n  Introduction. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul.
- Lipton, Michael.  1977. Why Poor People Stay Poor: Urban Bias  in  World Development. Cambridge, MA. Harvard University Press.
- Mahler, Halfdan. 1980. Foreword. In Can Health and Nutrition Interventions Make a Difference?, ed. Davidson R. Gwatkin, J. R. Wilcox, and J.  D. Wray, vi-ix.  Washington,  DC: Overseas Development Council.
- Mehta, Shiv R.  1984. Rural Development Policies and  Programmes. New Delhi: Sage Publications.
- Miller, Barbara D. 1986. Health, fertility, and society in India: Microstudies and macrostudies: A review article. Journal of Asian Studies 45:1027-36.
- Myrdal, Gunnar. 1957. Rich  Lands and Poor. New York: Harper &amp; Row.
- Nepal, Central Bureau of  Statistics. 1977. The Analysis of the Population Statistics of Nepal. Kathmandu: His Majesty's Government.

Payer, Cheryl. 1982. The World Bank: A  Critical Analysis. New York: Monthly Review Press. Schumacher, E. F.  1975. Small  is Beautiful. New York: Perennial Library.

- Sharpston, M. J. 1972.  Uneven geographical distribution of  medical care: A Ghanaian case study. Journal of Development Studies 8:205-22.
- Shrestha,  Nanda R. 1982. A preliminary report on population  pressure and land resources in Nepal. Journal of Developing  Areas 16:197-212.
- Shrestha, Nanda  R.  1985. The political  economy  of  external migration and economic underdevelopment in Nepal. Political Geography Quarterly 4289-306.
- Shrestha, Nanda R. 1987.  Institutional policies and migration behavior: A selective review. World Development 15:329-45.
- Shrestha,  Nanda  R., and Badri  N.  Kayastha.  1984. Midterm  Evaluation of the  Community  Based lntegrated Rural  Development Project  lmplemented  by  Save  the Children. Westport,  CT:  Save the Children, and Kathmandu:  N-F Development Consultants.
- Vaidya, B. N. 1979. Midterm Health Review 2035. Kathmandu: His Majesty's Government, Ministry of Health.
- World Bank. 1975. Health. Sector Policy Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.
- World Development Forum. 1985. Halving infant deaths 3:22. New York: Hunger Project.
- World Health Organization. 1978. Primary Health Care: Report  on  the lnternational Conference on Primary  Health Care, Alma-Ata, USSR. Geneva: World Health Organization.
- Worth,  Robert M., and Narayan  K.  Shah. 1969. Nepal  Health Survey 1965-1966. Honolulu: University of  Hawaii Press.

NANDA R. SHRESTHA (Ph.D., Indiana  University) is Assistant Professor of  Geography,  University  of  Wisconsin, Whitewater, WI  53190. He is interested  in  issues related  to  population  and development in Third World countries.

## COMMENTARY AND REPLY

Professional Geo rapher,  40(2), 1988, pp. 214-217 0 Copyright 1888 by Association of  American Geographers

## Venture Capital's Geography: A Comment on Leinbach and Amrhein*

The recent paper by Leinbach and Amrhein (1987)  presents some new and useful information on venture capital. We have been interested in venture capital for some time  now-as an  aspect  of  a  broader  project  on  new  technologies  and  industrial restructuring (Florida and Kenney 1988a, 1988b;  Kenney and Florida 1988).  Our brief commentary focuses on two areas: (1) the lack of  attention paid  to the structure of the  venture capital industry;  and (2) the geographic analysis itself which is  problematic

*The authors would like to thank Gordon Clark, Andy Mair, and the editors for their helpful comments.