’£Ė’£░

the  geographical  review

## RURAL  REGIONAL  GOVERNANCE  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES: THE  CASE  OF  THE  RESOURCE  CONSERVATION AND  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM*

MAX LU and JOHN C. JACOBS

abstract. Rural governance has drawn considerable attention from both local government officials and scholars in the United States since the early ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£░ s. It is touted as a way to mitigate the limitations of the traditional government unit-based approaches to problem solving and decision making and to foster partnerships across both jurisdictional boundaries and sectors (public, private, and nonprofit). Established in ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£▓ , the Resource Conservation and Development ( rc&amp;d ) program of the U.S. Department of Agriculture provides a unique model of rural regional governance. Acting as a coalition of governments, private businesses, individuals, and interest groups, the rc&amp;d program provides the flexibility needed to deal with issues at the appropriate spatial scale. It incorporates aspects of both grassroots and governmental organizations and can bring together local interests and expertise with governmental policy and support in service provision, problem solving, and economic development. The approach does not necessarily entail loss of power on the part of the state, but it does provide a mechanism for local people to exercise their agency, to tackle their problems, and to decide which elements of their lives they want to sustain.

Keywords: governance, Resource Conservation and Development program, rural development.

T he word 'governance' is slippery, for it has a number of different meanings. In this article it refers to a variety of horizontal, place-based, collaborative decisionmaking practices by a broad spectrum of people, private groups, and public organizations. It emphasizes citizen participation and is usually more responsive to national and regional diversity than the conventional sense of 'government,' which usually involves the formal, hierarchical institutions of the state and the application of laws and regulations (Goodwin ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė ;  Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ;  Clark,  Southern,  and  Beer ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę ; Furmankiewicz, Thompson, and Zielinska ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ; Ru├Łz, Hes, and Schwartz ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ ).

Since the mid-’£▒’£╣’£╣’£░ s, many rural-development scholars and practitioners have touted the benefits of governance, particularly regional partnerships that straddle traditional administrative boundaries, as an alternative to government in rural economic development and problem solving (Little ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ ;  Fluharty ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ;  Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ). Some scholars argue that governance is necessary if rural communities are to tackle effectively a multitude of challenges they face (Drabenstott, Novack, and Weiler ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ).  It  may  also  provide  economically  viable  and  socially  acceptable ways to navigate a transition toward sustainability because it facilitates discussion and compromise ( nrc ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ ),  and  is  therefore  conducive  to  conflict  resolution among different stakeholders about what to sustain. Although rural governance may take any one of a number of forms, scholars have generally viewed place-

* We would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers and Craig Colten for their thoughtful comments and suggestions for improving the manuscript.

/ornament11 Dr. Lu is an associate professor of geography at Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas ’£Č’£Č’£Ą’£░’£Č ; [maxlu@ksu.edu]. D ’Ø▓. J ’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø»’Øó’Ø│ is  an independent scholar in Ravenwood, Missouri ’£Č’£┤’£┤’£Ę’£╣ ; [jcjacobs @grm.net].

based partnerships or cooperatives as its main mode or expression. A growing body of literature has examined the circumstances under which a wide range of regional partnership organizations emerged in Australia, Britain, Colombia, the Netherlands, Poland, and the United States, as well as their structures, operations, and power relationships (Wiskerke and others ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ ;  Wilson ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ; Stanley, Marsden, and Milbourne ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ;  Jonas  and  Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ;  Clark,  Southern,  and  Beer ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę ; Warner ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę ; Hamin and Marcucci ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ė ; Derkzen ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ; Ru├Łz, Hes, and Schwartz ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ ; Pemberton and Shaw ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▓ ). Some authors have also examined the characteristics that make such organizations effective (Wiskerke and others ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ ; Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ; Furmankiewicz, Thompson, and Zielinska ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ).

Rarely mentioned in the literature is the fact that, although rural regional governance has received much recent attention, various governance practices have existed for quite some time (Jonas and Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ). As more and more places recognize and experiment with different governance frameworks, it is imperative that we examine existing governance organizations. Such an exercise may provide valuable lessons to those places that have just started or have yet to adopt rural governance. This article represents such an attempt by studying a rural regionalgovernance organization that has existed for half a century: the Resource Conservation and Development ( rc&amp;d ) program of the U.S. Department of Agriculture ( usda ).  The U.S. Congress established the rc&amp;d program in ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£▓ to  address the twin concerns of rural resource conservation and development. It assists communities in meeting a variety of locally identified needs through a system of grassroots organizations called 'councils' (Gadsby ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ). The rc&amp;d program now serves all fifty states of the United States, American Samoa, Guam, and the Caribbean (Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands). It has provided 'a way for people to plan and implement projects that will make their communities better places to live' ( nrcs ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ). The usda has  considered the rc&amp;d program 'one of the most successful rural development programs of the Federal Government' ( ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ) . Thus the rc&amp;d experience may provide useful insights into the way rural governance functions and the unique roles it plays in rural development.

To that end, we conducted archival research on the rc&amp;d program, including a detailed analysis of policy documents, Web sites, and reports and drew on John Jacobs's experience working at an rc&amp;d council in Alabama. To gain insights into how rc&amp;d councils operate, particularly how they deal with local issues, we conducted a content analysis of the ’£▓’£░’£░’£░ proceedings and the ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ program of the annual National Association of Resource Conservation &amp; Development Councils ( ’Ø«’ØĪ’Ø▓’ØŻ’£”’Øż’ØŻ ) conferences (Cummings ’£▓’£░’£░’£░ ; ’Ø«’ØĪ’Ø▓’ØŻ’£”’Øż’ØŻ ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ ). We also reviewed the project reports of the rc&amp;d councils in the state of Kansas for the years ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ -’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ and interviewed the rc&amp;d council presidents and coordinators in Kansas.

## The Impetus for Regional Governance in Rural America

In the United States, the recently heightened interest in rural governance stems from the need to solve practical problems and to collaborate across sectoral and jurisdictional boundaries. Flaws in the conventional administrative system have

long prompted local governments to look for alternative governing practices. In the established system, governmental units, usually counties or cities, serve as the most common basis for service delivery and decision making. The usefulness of statutory regions has declined over the years, however, because changes in population and in communication and transportation technologies have reduced the historic  rationale  for  county  seats  and  boundaries.  Many  problems  that  rural places face, such as lack of jobs, need for public water-system improvements, soil and water conservation, and waste disposal, transcend county boundaries and city limits. Tackling them often requires resources that are not available to individual jurisdictions. Responses to such problems will be more effective if we acknowledge their regional nature and incorporate it into the solutions. The conventional  political  system  does  not  provide  ways  for  rural  communities  to coordinate and cooperate. In fact, most state and federal funding mechanisms 'prohibit or discourage collaboration across sectors and jurisdictions' (Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ).  Not  surprisingly, rural  issues  whose areal extent crosses legal boundaries are often left unaddressed, and those that occur along jurisdictional boundaries in particular may not gain attention because the affected population in either jurisdiction is too small to have the necessary political clout (Porter and Wallis ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ). In the meantime, ongoing socioeconomic and technological changes also create opportunities for rural communities to develop new economic sectors and to increase competitiveness, but taking advantage of such opportunities usually necessitates collaboration among various government units and stakeholders (Drabenstott,  Novack, and Weiler ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ).

One potential means of alleviating the limitations of jurisdictional units is to reconfigure them through reorganization and consolidation, but political entities exhibit an inherent resistance to change, especially when it may result in the loss of power for existing interest groups. The existing county boundaries ensured that residents could reach their county seats within a day's round-trip travel before the automobile era. They have changed little over the last ’£▓’£░’£░ years despite the altered spatial reality imposed first by automobiles and telephones and, more recently, by computers and the Internet. There seems little support for change, as evidenced by persistent resistance to passing resolutions for merging county governments (Porter and Wallis ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ).  This approach is therefore not politically feasible. Regional governance provides an alternative for interjurisdictional cooperation and collaborative problem solving.

An increasing awareness of the conventional system's limitations and the coalescing of several factors prompted the recent push for rural governance in the United States (Fluharty ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ; Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ). The first factor is the ongoing changes in  rural  America, particularly the emergence of a 'new rural paradigm' (Ward and Brown ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ ).  'Rural' is  not  synonymous with 'agricultural' anymore. Indeed, the economic fortunes of rural America have long depended on manufacturing and other nonfarm sectors instead of the primary sector. Rural policy making must consider this postproductivist nature of the countryside. On the other hand,

the fact  that  rural  residents  tend  to  be  less  educated,  older,  and  poorer  and  to experience higher levels of unemployment disadvantages them in economic development (Quigley ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ).  In  addition  to  having  a  generally  small  and  dispersed population, many places in Rural America have also been losing population since the early part of the twentieth century, with concomitant weakening and disappearance of functional organizations (Brown ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ;  Norris-Baker ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ ; Wuthnow ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ). This leaves residents with a lack of community cohesiveness and limits their ability to effect changes and control their destinies. The diseconomies of scale lead to higher costs, both for providing social services to rural residents and for running private business enterprises, and lack of a modern telecommunications network further reduces rural areas' ability to attract industry (Marshall ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ ).

Compounding the issue is the enormous diversity that exists across the rural landscape. Every rural place has a unique, evolving identity with problems that are specific to it. Every place also possesses different strengths and needs, which determine its available options. The conventional approach in the United States relies  on  sectoral ’ø× usually agricultural ’ø× and generic policies and programs, particularly at the state and national levels. These policies attempt to address specific situations with prescribed solutions and are applied in a blanket manner throughout a governmental unit's purview. These one-size-fits-all policies ignore the uniqueness of rural places and therefore may not be very effective (MacLeod ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ ; Pezzini ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ ;  Harrison ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ).

Another factor is that, even as rural areas experience the challenges of a declining and aging population, weakening social institutions, and shrinking resources, the federal government has been devolving roles and responsibilities down to state and local governments because of 'the increasingly bipartisan conviction that in matters of domestic policy, government closest to the people governs best' and government cutbacks pushed relentlessly by Republican politicians (Eisinger ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė , ’£│’£▒’£┤ -’£│’£▒’£Ą ). Rural governments increasingly have to compete with urban and suburban areas for federal block grants, but a lack of capacity for grant writing and data analysis puts them at a significant disadvantage (Fluharty ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ).  In  the  meantime, rural areas also have markedly fewer philanthropic resources to tap into. All of  these  factors  are  likely  to  make  it  increasingly  difficult  to  provide  those  who choose to remain in rural areas with a viable lifestyle.

Facing the stark reality in rural America, more and more local government officials, community leaders, and scholars are realizing that the existing structure of cities, towns, and counties no longer adequately reflects either the spatial identification of rural citizens or the problems that beset them. In order to deal with their challenges and take advantage of new opportunities, rural areas need to collaborate  across  public,  private,  and  nonprofit  sectors  and  to  pool  their  resources, talents,  and  capacities.  This  realization  is  even  bringing  former  rivals  together (Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ).

Since the ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£░ s many rural governance experiments have appeared in different parts of the United States (Fluharty ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ;  Jonas  and  Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ;  Stark ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ;

Hamin and Marcucci ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ė ;  Lu ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ ).  In  contrast  to  proposals  for  government consolidation, these practices do not impose a new administrative level over existing governments. Their chief concern is to foster regional partnerships and to achieve the critical mass to solve practical regional problems (Porter and Wallis ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ). Their structures do not rely on governmental entities and are conducive to coalitions among existing legal jurisdictions. In other words, they create a new governance capacity that augments, rather than usurps, existing governmental institutions (Porter and Wallis ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ; Jonas and Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ); hence they are politically  feasible.

Given the multitude of governance innovations, one key question to ask is, What makes for effective governance? Nancy Stark claims that the practice of effective  governance possesses three traits: collaboration across sectors ’ø× both public and private ’ø× and political boundaries, sustained citizen engagement, and leveraging regional resources ( ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ). Although many place-specific factors may influence the outcome of any governance interventions (Clark, Southern, and Beer ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę ), we believe there is value in examining the experience of existing governance practices. Any discussion of rural governance cannot avoid considering the legacy of older structures (Jonas and Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ).  Our  study  focuses  on  the rc&amp;d program because it is a longtime, nationwide governance model, and many rural development practitioners consider it a success story.

## The Resource Conservation and Development Program

First authorized by Section ’£▒’£░’£▓ of the Food and Agriculture Act of ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£▓ , the rc&amp;d program aims 'to accelerate the conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources to improve the general level of economic activity and to enhance the environment and standard of living' in authorized rc&amp;d areas ( usda ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£╣ ). In ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£┤ Orville  Freeman, then U.S. Secretary of Agriculture, authorized ten widely dispersed pilot rc&amp;d councils in distressed areas with declining populations and economies (Gadsby ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ).  The  program was reauthorized in each subsequent farm bill and received permanent authorization in the ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ farm  bill.  But  the program's growth was uneven. By ’£▒’£╣’£Ę’£░ the number of councils had increased to ’£Č’£Ė , and ’£▒’£▓’£Ą more were approved during the ensuing decade. Only ten councils were approved in the ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£░ s, due to the opposition from the Reagan administration, but the ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£░ s saw ’£▒’£▓’£Č councils receiving approval. In ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ a total of ’£│’£Ę’£Ą rc&amp;d councils existed across the United States, which covered ’£Ė’£Ą percent of the U.S. counties and more than ’£Ė’£░ percent  of  the  U.S.  population  ( nrcs ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ).  T wenty-five  applications are still awaiting usda approval. Many states have a complete rc&amp;d coverage; others are only partially served.

The rc&amp;d program has a simple organizational structure, with grassroots councils being the only governance level mandated and approved by law. Local sponsors who want to work together to find solutions to local problems and to improve their quality of life initiate and sustain rc&amp;d councils.  Creation of an rc&amp;d council is an expression of the human agency and existing social capital in a

region. Just about any officially recognized groups ’ø× for example, counties, towns, conservation districts, councils of government, regional planning bodies, municipalities,  local  nonprofit  organizations,  Native American tribal bodies, and other special districts ’ø× can be rc&amp;d sponsors. To be authorized by the usda , each council  must  develop  and  adopt  an  area  plan,  which  should  spell  out  in  detail  the characteristics of the council area, its needs, and the sponsors' long-term plan to meet those needs. Sponsors create the area plan with public participation to ensure that the resulting council goals and objectives reflect the priority concerns of the region ( usda ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£╣ ; ’Ø«’ØĪ’Ø▓’ØŻ’£”’Øż’ØŻ ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ).  The area plan becomes the basis for an annual work plan that sets out the projects or measures for the coming year. Each annual plan serves as a timely assessment of a council's progress. Membership in the rc&amp;d council consists of representatives from each of its sponsors but may also include at-large members, such as private organizations and individuals, as councils deem appropriate. In other words, rc&amp;d membership is not completely open to  everyone.

Each council has a coordinator who acts as an administrator, manager, and general factotum for the council ( usda ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£╣ ). The coordinators are usually, though not always, employees of the Natural Resources Conservation Service ( nrcs )  of the usda ,  but  they  carry  out  the  projects  of  their  councils,  which  makes  their position rather unique within the usda . They refer to their position as being entrepreneurial, which reflects both the enthusiasm they bring to their job and the lack of guidance they receive from their superiors. Although the nrcs officially administered the rc&amp;d program within the usda until April ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ , when Congress eliminated federal funding for the program, rc&amp;d councils operated at the local level. The nrcs 's mandate was to provide support and assistance. Councils chose their projects with minimal program guidance from the nrcs and implemented them with the assistance of usda agencies and various other public and private organizations.

Member counties, communities, or organizations within a council may propose measures or specific projects that meet their council's goals. They are often multifarious. The council approves and prioritizes them based on such things as need, cost, and order of proposal. Similar measures may be combined. The spatial extent of measures ranges from a single county to several counties or parts of counties and may sometimes involve multiple rc&amp;d councils.  The  proposing individual or agency frequently is assigned the responsibility for a measure. The role of the council may include soliciting public opinion and support, finding financial resources, developing a stand-alone subcommittee or organization to oversee the measure, coordinating volunteer activities, and serving as the administrative and fiduciary agent. Council members and staff may assume these responsibilities.

RC&amp;D councils function as organizations of organizations. Individuals participate  in  the rc&amp;d program usually as representatives of other organizations, such as county commissions or soil and water conservation districts. The common

thread running through the rc&amp;d program is cooperation among a variety of private organizations and individuals, as well as governments. The composition of collaborators may vary with the needs of each measure. The rc&amp;d program is successful when it can pull together the necessary components in creating a solution to a local problem.

Consistent with the rc&amp;d mission, councils provide a wide range of educational, technical, and financial assistance for the betterment of rural communities. Councils usually seek to develop partnerships with local and outside groups and organizations, both private and public, for completing various projects and achieving council goals. Such partnership has allowed the program to succeed in projects where governmental agencies have been limited by their political boundaries. By involving the separate governments the rc&amp;d program avoids becoming a threat to these existing institutions. Its ability to identify regions and to avoid jurisdictional conflicts demonstrates its political practicality as a rural intervention strategy.

## Spatial Imaginaries of RC&amp;D Councils

Spatial imaginaries refer to the demarcation of 'a local economic space with an imagined community of economic interests' (Jessop ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ę , ’£Č’£▒ ). They affect the choice of partners, and more important, the governance capacity and effectiveness of a new institution (Harvey, Hawkins, and Thomas ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ ).  How a rural governance organization imagines and interprets the regional spaces in which it functions, especially whether it can go beyond sometimes-contested local political boundaries (Pemberton and Goodwin ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ), is therefore a critically important issue to discuss. Our analysis of the rationale behind rc&amp;d council areas across the United States shows that the rc&amp;d approach in forming regions may be best characterized as ad hoc. Council sponsors define a region based on common issues or conditions to be addressed. The perceived areal extent of the issues or conditions in hand determines, usually loosely, the regional boundaries. In many cases, the commonly understood natural ’ø× especially watershed ’ø× and cultural regions appear to shape their spatial imaginaries. As such, council areas do not necessarily follow established political boundaries.

The actual shape of council areas may have also been influenced by the general guidelines for council authorization, which require evidence that a proposed council area both possesses geographical cohesion and is spatially contiguous: 'The size and configuration of an area must be based on the sponsors' assessment of rural development needs, institutional arrangements, and the natural resources of the region. Boundaries of an rc&amp;d area are established on a multijurisdictional basis to make the most efficient use of plans relating to land conservation, water management, community development, and environmental enhancement' ( usda ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£╣ ). The rc&amp;d council areas range in size from one county to as many as seventeen counties, with an average of seven or eight counties. Member counties are usually included in their entirety in an rc&amp;d council, but twenty-six divided counties  exist.  In  some  of  these  cases  the rc&amp;d council serves only part of a county,

leaving the rest unserved. Other counties are served by two different councils, and in one case three separate rc&amp;d councils serve a single county (Hinsdale County, in Colorado), due to accessibility issues caused by rugged terrain. The rc&amp;d councils  not  only  can  extend  their  spatial  imaginary  far  beyond political boundaries but also have shown an ability to redefine and renegotiate a suitable economic space for manageable intervention. In other words, the rc&amp;d council areas are not necessarily fixed and immutable.

## socioeconomic and physical considerations in rc&amp;d council areas

To illustrate how socioeconomic and physical considerations affected the choice of partners we examined how well the rc&amp;d council areas in Kansas fit within the state's tourism and physiographic regions. Kansas has eleven rc&amp;d councils (including two pending approval and one in the process of forming), which cover ’£╣’£│ of  the  state's ’£▒’£░’£Ą counties (Figure ’£▒ ).  These  council  areas  show considerable regional coherence and tend to correspond to accepted regional delineations, although they do not map neatly onto either tourism or physiographic regions (Figure ’£▓ ).

The sponsors appeared to have an awareness of their regions, however naive their concept of a region is. Each council area is responsive to its landscape in Carl Sauer's sense; that is, as the manifestation of culture acting on a natural environment. The councils, particularly the earlier ones, display considerable homogeneity in their makeup. Council names often reflect the residents' shared identity. For example, the Flint Hills Council takes up most of the southern portion of the Flint Hills  region  in  the  state,  whence  it  derives  its  name.  This  is  an  area  of  rolling limestone and shale hills that offers great expanses of native grass for grazing. Few towns in the council area have a population of more than ’£▒’£░ , ’£░’£░’£░ .  Agriculture is the primary source of employment. According to the council president, 'The decision to add or not add counties to our area has revolved around whether the counties have similar interests, problems, needs, etc. All of the counties in the Flint Hills RC&amp;D area are heavily into cattle production and grazing issues' (Schmidt ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ).

The Western Prairie RC&amp;D area, located in the highest part of the state (see Figure ’£▒ ), is the sedimentary gift of the Rocky Mountains much farther to the west, with flat to gently rolling terrain. The council area occupies much of the northern lobe of the Ogallala Aquifer in Kansas. The vegetation there consists mostly of short grasses, hence the word 'prairie' in the council's name. The population density is low, with widely scattered homesteads and few small towns. No town in the council area has a population of more than ’£▒’£░ , ’£░’£░’£░ .  Ranching is the primary agricultural activity in the region, but irrigated crops are also common. The council area was chosen 'by surveying the counties on their common natural resources, economic resources, social resources, and their needs and concerns,' according to the council's coordinator (Cheney ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ).

n Kansas .= IDevelopment Council Areas and Conservationa Resource

<!-- image -->

F ’Ø®’Ø¦. ’£▒’ø× Resource Conservation and Development Council areas in Kansas. Source: ’Ø«’Ø▓’ØŻ’Ø│ ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę.

Kansas Mapof Generalized Physiographic

<!-- image -->

F ’Ø®’Ø¦. ’£▓’ø× The generalized physiography of Kansas. Source: Modified from ’Ø½’Ø│’Ø¦ ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę . (Cartography by Max Lu)

The Solomon Valley RC&amp;D area is in the Smoky Hills physiographic region of Kansas. Its name comes from the Solomon River, whose north and south forks run through it. The unifying aspect of the council area is that it is the transition zone from tall grasses to short grasses as one travels westward across Kansas. Its coordinator explains the rationale behind the council area thus: 'The six counties in the Solomon Valley RC&amp;D were chosen due to their homogeneous nature. The physical  features  of  the  area  are  all  very  similar  including  soils,  native  plant  species, hydrography, topography, and climate. All the counties are the same size and have very similar populations. Culturally, livestock and land management practices are  very  similar'  (Juhl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ).

Regional governance is most effective when the region in which it functions reflects a common identity and deals with common problems. This appears to be the case in Kansas rc&amp;d councils. The rc&amp;d practices in forming council regions echo Daryl Hobbs's belief that attachment to place can be a motivation for cooperation at the regional level and the efficacy of social organizations depends on the spatial extent of the problem addressed and the recognition of that spatiality ( ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ą ).

## flexibility in rc&amp;d council regions

Having the flexibility to adjust the extent of a region to include all of the areas with a  common problem or a common identity is an important aspect of regional governance. The rc&amp;d program has shown organizational flexibility in forming councils that are multistate or include divided counties in order to better reflect the regional identity of the areas they serve. Councils have also restructured or renegotiated their regions as needed: Rural issues often are transitory, and the regional organization formed to deal with them should adapt accordingly to recognize changed regional understandings. These practices demonstrate the regional fidelity of the program.

Perhaps the more extreme case of the rc&amp;d program's adherence to a perceived region is found in the formation of councils that include areas in more than one state.  Nationwide, seven rc&amp;d councils  fall  into  this  category.  For  example,  the Western Wyoming and High Country, Idaho rc&amp;d councils, created in ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£Ę and ’£▒’£╣’£Ę’£╣ ,  respectively,  are  adjacent  but  share  areas  in  two  states  because  the  rugged landscape there creates divisions not reflected by linear state borders. In the words of the coordinator for the Western Wyoming RC&amp;D region:

I can tell you the boundaries are based on decisions made by the local people. The reasons for including parts of Bonneville and Caribou counties (the Freedom area residents) in Idaho is because they are in the Salt River watershed area and a large mountain range naturally separates the area from the rest of their counties. The people in that area are part of Star Valley and they interact socially in churches, go to school and do business with other Star Valley residents. They felt most of the issues, concerns and ultimately the solutions were associated with those of the Salt River Watershed and Star Valley. The same logic and reasons applied conversely for the people in the

area of Teton County (Alta and surrounding area of Wyoming) west of the Teton Mountain range. That area is part of the Teton River watershed the bulk of which is in Idaho. Again, many of the concerns and problems are best solved working with others in that river drainage. Hence they are part of the High Country (Idaho) RC&amp;D. (Heaton ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ )

Similarly,  the  Bear  River  RC&amp;D region, created in ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£Č ,  has  three  member counties (Rich, Cache, and Box Elder) in Utah and four counties (Bear Lake, Franklin, Caribou, and Oneida) in Idaho. Its unifying factor is the watershed of the Bear River, which drains the region. Its Web site provides a justification for the region: 'The common threads that weave our society together in the Bear River Basin give us the ability and reasons to organize and mobilize region-wide resources, communities, and citizens to define, develop and direct projects that are important to the region as a whole' (Bear River RC&amp;D ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ ).  Not surprisingly, the portion of Caribou County not drained by the Bear River participates in the Western Wyoming RC&amp;D region.

Similar economic challenges may also bring counties in neighboring states into the same council. The Ore-Cal RC&amp;D region includes Klamath and Lake counties in Oregon and Siskiyou and the northwestern part of Modoc County and the western part of Shasta County in California. The council area encompasses ’£▒’£Ą . ’£Ą million acres and serves ’£▓’£Č’£Ą , ’£░’£░’£░ people. The council was formed in response to a shared socioeconomic situation. Organized in ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£│ , the council initially dealt with the depressed economy resulting from environmental laws that limited harvesting in the region and therefore severely reduced the number of lumbering jobs. Situated between the Pacific Coastal Range, the southern end of the Cascade Range, and the northern range of the Sierra Nevada Mountains, the council area encompasses the region north of Mount Shasta.

In these cases, the rc&amp;d councils must involve two separate nrcs state organizational structures. This requires considerable administrative effort and an ongoing commitment to maintaining communication with each of the states involved. But the councils see the necessity of doing that for the purpose of council efficacy.

Sometimes new councils are derived from preexisting councils in recognition of their unique regional identities, which demonstrates another aspect of the flexibility  of  council  regions.  Not  only  is  the  creation  of  these  councils  a  matter  of added efficiency, it may also be seen as recognition of the importance of the subregional identity or coherence. For example, the Navajo RC&amp;D region separated from the Little Colorado River RC&amp;D region in ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ę . It incorporated lands within the Western Agency of the Navajo Nation. The council's area includes five Navajo Nation soil and water conservation districts and comprises ’£▒’£│ million  acres.  It covers parts of Coconino, Navajo, and Apache counties in Arizona, McKinley and San Juan counties in New Mexico, and San Juan County in Utah, which makes it the only rc&amp;d region that involves three states. The Hub RC&amp;D region, formed in ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£░ , serves the land in the region that is not part of the Navajo RC&amp;D Council and the Eastern Agency of the Navajo Nation. Two counties in New Mexico are

divided between the two councils. Both of these councils operate under the burden of mixed jurisdictions in a 'checkerboard' pattern, where several federal agencies and a variety of Native American nations control separate portions of the council areas.

In ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ , five counties (George, Hancock, Harrison, Jackson, and Stone) in the Southeast Mississippi RC&amp;D Council joined the southern county (Pearl River) in the Southwest Mississippi RC&amp;D Council to form the Mississippi Coastal Plains RC&amp;D region. Its area constitutes the part of Mississippi that is adjacent to the Gulf Coast and supports a culture and economy distinct from that of the rest of the state.

The ability shown by the rc&amp;d program to adjust to spatial realities both in the formation and reconfiguration of council areas demonstrates an awareness of the importance of an appropriate space as the structural element required for the organization's success. This responsiveness is an essential component of regional governance, which develops structures that empower local communities by facilitating the creation of organizations and associations whose spatial purview matches the geographical extent of the problems they face (Pemberton &amp; Goodwin ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ ; Harvey, Hawkins, and Thomas ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ ).

## The Hybrid Nature of Resource Conservation and Development

The shift toward a governance approach in rural areas is often linked to a changing role of the state in rural development from a provider of support and a sole policy maker to a coordinator and manager of various participants through facilitation  and  negotiation  (Marsden ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė ;  Cloke,  Milbourne,  and Widdowfield ’£▓’£░’£░’£░ ; Little ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ ; Wilson ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ). The governmentality critique of the 'deceptively benign notion of inclusive community participation' (Edwards, Goodwin, and Woods ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ , ’£▒’£╣’£▓ ), especially of partnerships, which have become central to contemporary rural governance, has problematized this discourse. Bob Jessop, for example, argued that governance often operates in the shadow of government ( ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ , ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ).  A  state  may  withdraw direct intervention and instead exercise its power 'at a distance' (Murdoch and Ward ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ę ).  Furthermore, the rural governance discourse does not recognize conflict or power differences among partners and is overly optimistic about the role of dialogue in hammering out issues and reaching a community consensus. What may happen in this process is that 'the striving for consensus on policy agendas laid down by central government effectively restricts political debate and reaffirms the power of existing state agencies' (Clark, Southern, and Beer ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę , ’£▓’£Ą’£Č ).

In many governance cases, financial aid from government is considered critical  to  program success, and some authors have called this 'budgetary shackles' (for  example, Wilson ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ ).  The rc&amp;d program's dependence on state funding has changed over time. During its early years it received an annual allocation of funds from the then Soil Conservation Service (renamed 'Natural Resources Conservation Service' in ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£┤ ).  These funds were frequently used for water and soil

conservation projects that fulfilled the nrcs 's missions. The annual allotment was often distributed within the councils by rotating the county that benefited each year. The ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£░ farm bill ended this lump-sum funding, but the federal government still supported each rc&amp;d council financially and the nrcs provided a coordinator,  office  space,  and  various  other  assistance.  Congress's  decision  to  eliminate federal funding for the rc&amp;d program in April ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ as part of its efforts to reduce the budget deficit officially ended the long partnership between rc&amp;d councils and the nrcs . This happened just as rc&amp;d councils across the country were preparing to celebrate their fiftieth anniversary.

The elimination of federal money may prove to be the greatest challenge yet facing the program. To their credit, many rc&amp;d councils over the years have sought outside support for their projects. They became nonprofit organizations, as required by the U.S. tax law in order to accept and manage grants. The federal and state governments, however, were major sources of such grants, and their influence on the operation of rc&amp;d councils cannot be downplayed. Although some rc&amp;d councils are able to generate enough funds to be self-sufficient, many are not and urgently need to secure new sources of funding and new partnerships. Whether they can survive what ’Ø«’ØĪ’Ø▓’ØŻ’£”’Øż’ØŻ President Olga Walter characterizes as an 'RC&amp;D recession' and how this will change them are yet to be seen ( ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▓ ).

The rc&amp;d program differs considerably from other usda programs because of its  focus  on  local  directions  and  control.  Whereas  most usda rural  programs, such as the Soil and Water Conservation districts and the Cooperative Extension offices, are situated and function within political units or physiographic regions ’ø× for example, water management districts ’ø× rc&amp;d councils  function  in,  but  are  not limited to, self-defined and self-chosen regions. A council comes into being when local  sponsors come together to request recognition of that region as a council area.

Gene Summers's discussion of the modes of social intervention is useful in understanding the nature of the rc&amp;d program ( ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£Č ). He distinguished three modes of social  intervention to categorize organizational methods ’ø× authoritative, clientcentered, and radical reform. The first two modes are particularly relevant here. The authoritative mode involves an outside agent that 'introduces a change in the belief that the project will improve the community and that it is in line with the self-interest of the community' (p. ’£│’£Č’£▓ ). Three conditions in the relationship between the provider and the recipient are implicit. First, someone other than the recipient usually decides that a problem exists and determines the best way to solve it.  Second,  the  provider's  knowledge  is  presumed,  often  by  both  parties,  to  be superior to the recipient's. Finally, 'there exists a social and political climate in which a provider-recipient relationship can be established' (p. ’£│’£Č’£▓ ). Many usda programs fit this model. Although partnered with a local advisory board, the nrcs , the Cooperative Extension Service ( ces ) and the Farm Service Agency ( fsa ) all administer programs that are developed at the federal or state ’ø× in the case of the ces ’ø× levels.  These  agencies  meet  all  three  authoritative  intervention  condi-

tions that Summers described. Practices, programs, and projects devolve from a higher, outside level. They are determined with minimal local input, based on the presumption that the provider has greater knowledge. Moreover, these agencies occupy an accepted position as benefactors in the sociopolitical world of rural America.

Client-centered intervention 'places great emphasis on political equality and popular sovereignty as the means by which citizens control their own lives' (Summers ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£Č , ’£│’£Č’£│ ). This implies that the intervening agent relies on local people to make the choices concerning what is best for them. The second condition of authoritative intervention is not necessarily violated, but the presumption here is that the local community should be a partner in identifying and choosing remedies  for  their  problems.  The rc&amp;d program fits  the  client-centered  model.  It avoids the problem of experts expropriating the prerogative of local peoples by requiring a bottom-up process of adopting council measures. The rc&amp;d coordinator ’ø× usually an employee of the nrcs ’ø× may provide information on projects to the council,  but the decision to adopt a project is the council's. The state's role changes from a 'provider of support to one of co-ordinator and manager of various participants in the process of governance,' as Jo Little ( ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ , ’£╣’£Ė ) pointed out in  her  discussion  of  rural  governance.  In  that  sense, rc&amp;d councils  are  like 'quangos' ’ø× quasi-autonomous nongovernmental organizations ’ø× in Britain (Johnson ’£▒’£╣’£Ę’£╣ ),  which combine aspects of government and public organizations, but ’Ø▓’ØŻ’£”’Øż councils may be more flexible both in space and purview.

It  is,  ipso  facto,  difficult  for  governmentally sponsored organizations to be radical reformers, and certainly neither the usda nor the rc&amp;d program is such. But we noticed that in some councils the soil conservation board representatives harbor the fear that if membership in the councils becomes too broad, 'environmentalists' and other perceived 'radicals' will hijack the agenda. This may be  a  response  to  the  tendency  of  environmental  groups  to  consider  modern, large-scale farming as damaging to nature, which has alienated farmers. But it also has to do with the inherent conservatism of the rural board members. This mind-set inevitably limits the diversity of membership and the breadth of the councils' impact.

Inevitably,  tension  exists  between  the rc&amp;d program and its sponsor ’ø× the nrcs ’ø× due to their different natures. Being a well-established bureaucracy, the nrcs has  a  rigid  command  structure.  The rc&amp;d program, on the other hand, functions at only a single level: the council. The rc&amp;d coordinators must report to the nrcs and  satisfy  an  annual  planning  requirement, but councils made their own decisions. The nrcs culture  is  one  of  specific,  measurable  projects,  which mostly address soil and water conservation. Its accomplishments are easily measured by how many feet of terrace were built, how many conservation plans were written, and so on. But rc&amp;d measures, such as forming a shiitake mushroomgrowers' cooperative, developing a local museum, offering a leadership seminar, or coordinating multicounty waste-management programs, are not so easily quan-

tifiable within the nrcs culture and in fact fall well beyond the ken of the nrcs overseers.

The hybrid nature of the rc&amp;d program gives it both advantages and disadvantages. As a service delivery effort, the rc&amp;d program does not suffer from the constraining nature of the usda 's bureaucratic structure. Nor does it face the two problems that William Browne and Louise Swanson identified as affecting other usda agencies:  'First,  agencies  are  guided  by  program goals rather than by the actual needs of rural communities. Second, rural communities must bend their development priorities to the goals and requirements of specific categorical grants, an accommodation that diverts their scarce development efforts away from more pressing needs' ( ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ą , ’£┤’£Ė’£╣ ). On the other hand, the rc&amp;d program has not had its own constituency within the usda bureaucracy. This forced the continuing involvement of rc&amp;d volunteers in lobbying for renewal legislation and budgeting matters in each agricultural budgeting cycle until its permanent authorization in ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ .  The rc&amp;d program relies on the cooperation of the major agencies of the usda as well as other federal, state and private agencies to provide expertise and assistance for their projects.

One problem that the rc&amp;d program sometimes faces is 'turf wars' within the usda and state agencies. These conflicts stem from the culture of the usda , where the various agencies feel they have to compete for a share of departmental funding. These conflicts may also arise at the local level when local agency offices perceive the rc&amp;d program to be encroaching on their areas of expertise. The rc&amp;d program has been able to avoid many potential conflicts by co-opting these agencies; that is, including their personnel and expertise in the council as members and as partners in the projects. The impact of such turf battles is further reduced by the fact that rc&amp;d councils take on many projects that other organizations consider too small, too broad, or inappropriate. The rc&amp;d program's tendency to deemphasize politics and conflict, particularly to shun active political organizing for change, is typical of regional governance practices in the United States, including more recent initiatives (Jonas and Pincetl ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č ).

In their study of housing development, Jonathan Murdoch and Simone Abram stated that governance is compromised by existing state policies and practices and by established power groups ( ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė ). They make the valid and necessary point that the interest of the state often overrides local desires. This is also true in the activities of the rc&amp;d program, where national policies concerning environmental protection and socioeconomic development determine many of the councils' projects. However, the concept of governance as we use it in this article assumes a partnership among state, local, and private interests and does not specify which element will have the greatest influence. The utility in regional governance as shown in the rc&amp;d program is that it provides a mechanism through which local communities can satisfy the dictates of national and state policy while maintaining their autonomy. The rc&amp;d program offers a means of circumventing these conflicts by developing organizational structures that deal with problems spatially by pre-

senting an ostensibly apolitical method for handling them. The constituent governments may accept the regional model developed to solve the problem without loss  of  prerogative.

## Toward More Effective Rural Governance

Rural governance has received much recent attention in the United State as an alternative to the traditional, administrative unit-based approach to rural problem solving and decision making. This form of governing rural areas is conducive to interjurisdictional cooperation and partnership building, features that are increasingly important, because many issues facing rural places transcend arbitrarily set  and  obsolescent political ’ø× particularly county ’ø× boundaries, and dealing with them effectively requires rural communities to pool their talents and resources. The changing political reality, whereby the federal government is asking local governments to take on more and more responsibilities even as the resources at their disposal shrink, makes the transition to governance more urgent. By engaging a wide range of stakeholders in the decision-making process, the new governance approach can help alleviate the inefficiencies and problems of welfarist state policies, which are prevalent in the traditional system and which suppress individual endeavor (Higgins and Lockie ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ ;  Higgins and Lawrence ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą ).  It  also promises to be more responsive to the substantial socioeconomic and environmental diversity across the rural landscape.

A number of different governance models have emerged across rural America in the last two decades or so, with partnerships of various kinds being dominant. One key issue that concerns rural policy makers and community leaders is how to make sure that the institutional innovations help achieve rural development objectives. Examining the experience of existing regional governance organizations may offer valuable lessons in how effective rural governance functions. The rc&amp;d program of the usda provides a unique example of public-private partnership. Though administered through the usda ,  the rc&amp;d program is driven by voluntary, grassroots initiatives on the part of interested stakeholders who seek collaborative measures rather than regulatory solutions to regional challenges.  Its  only  organizational  structure  is  the  council,  which  functions  in  a region defined by the local people who initiated it. Councils choose the projects they undertake within the loose guidelines laid down in their charter. The role of the governments involved is to provide guidance and assistance in accomplishing the councils' projects.

Effectively combining state support and community initiative may be a key to the success of the rc&amp;d program. Indeed, the lack of government support is considered to have contributed to the failure of an earlier effort that was similar to the rc&amp;d program. In the ’£▒’£╣’£Ą’£░ s  the usda established  the  Rural  Area  Development Committees program, whose objectives were essentially the same as those of the rc&amp;d program. The initiative for forming committees to oversee rural development was entirely local, too, but it failed in the ’£▒’£╣’£Č’£░ s. The reasons for its failure

probably include its entirely voluntary nature and the lack of funding and support from within the usda (Browne and Swanson ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ą ). The rc&amp;d program, though still voluntary, has enjoyed support from all usda agencies through a memorandum of understanding. The memorandum's signatories, including the Agricultural Research Service, the Cooperative State Research, the Education and Extension Service, the Economic Research Service, the Natural Resource Conservation Service, and the Rural Development and Rural Utilities Service form a policy advisory board that coordinates cooperation with the rc&amp;d program.

The rc&amp;d councils' ability to identify appropriate regions in which to function and to tap into the council members' shared sense of region contributes to the cohesiveness of the council membership and ultimately to its effectiveness. Although places without rc&amp;d coverage may have other means of carrying out similar projects, the rc&amp;d program exemplifies a way in which jurisdictional units can cooperate and respond to the amorphous and transitory needs of communities at the  appropriate spatial  scale  without  creating  a  contender  for  political  power within a region. The steady growth of the rc&amp;d program since its inception without aggressive support from the nrcs and in the face of opposition from the Reagan administration in the ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£░ s  indicates  a  recognition  of  the  value  of  this  type  of regional governance. Whether the program continues to grow now that federal funding is gone will be interesting to see. Regardless, one lesson from the rc&amp;d experience is that regional governance can be an effective means of both delivering services to specific areas and reducing the waste and frustration brought on by the sectoral  application of one-size-fits-all  solutions  to  problems  that  are  spatially unique.

## References

- Bear River RC&amp;D. ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ . Bear River RC&amp;D Mission Statement. Formerly at [www.bearriverrcd.org /mission.html].
- Brown, P. L. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . Beacons of Faith Are Dimming on the Prairie. New York Times, ’£Ę July, ’£▒ , ’£▒’£┤ . [www.nytimes.com/ ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ / ’£░’£Ę / ’£░’£Ę /us/beacons-of-faith-are-dimming-on-the-prairie.html].
- Browne, W. P., and L. E. Swanson. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ą . Living with the Minimum: Rural Public Policy. In The Changing American Countryside: Rural People and Places, edited by E. N. Castle, ’£┤’£Ė’£▒ -’£┤’£╣’£▓ . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Cheney, D. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . E-mail correspondence with John Jacobs, ’£▒’£Ą March.
- Clark, D., R. Southern, and J. Beer. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę . Rural Governance, Community Empowerment and the New Institutionalism: A Case Study of the Isle of Wight. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£│ ( ’£▓ ): ’£▓’£Ą’£┤ -’£▓’£Č’£Č .
- Cloke, P., P . Milbourne, and R. Widdowfield. ’£▓’£░’£░’£░ . Partnerships and Policy Networks in Rural Local Governance: Homelessness in Taunton. Public Administration ’£Ę’£Ė ( ’£▒ ): ’£▒’£▒’£▒ -’£▒’£│’£│ .
- Cummings, D., ed. ’£▓’£░’£░’£░ . Conserving Our Past &amp; Developing Our Future: Proceedings of the Third National RC&amp;D Conference . Madison, Wis.: OmniPress.
- Derkzen, P. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ . Rural Partnerships in Europe ’ø× A Differentiated View from a Country Perspective: The Netherlands and Wales. European Urban and Regional Studies ’£▒’£Ę ( ’£▒ ): ’£▒’£Ę -’£│’£░ .
- Drabenstott, M., N. Novack, and S. Weiler. ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ . New Governance for a New Rural Economy: Reinventing Public and Private Institutions ’ø× A Conference Summary. In New Governance for a New Rural Economy: Reinventing Public and Private Institutions, ’£▒ -’£Ę .  Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Center for the Study of Rural America.
- Edwards, B., M. Goodwin, and M. Woods. ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ . Citizenship, Community and Participation in Small Towns: A Case Study of Regeneration Partnerships. In Urban Renaissance? New Labour, Community, and Urban Policy, edited by R. Imrie and M. Raco, ’£▒’£Ė’£▒ -’£▓’£░’£┤ . Bristol U.K.: Policy Press.

- Eisinger, P . ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė . City Politics in an Era of Federal Devolution. Urban Affairs Review ’£│’£│ ( ’£│ ): ’£│’£░’£Ė -’£│’£▓’£Ą .
- Fluharty, C. W. ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ . Assessing the State of Rural Governance in the United States. In New Governance for a New Rural Economy: Reinventing Public and Private Institutions, ’£▓’£╣ -’£┤’£Ę . Kansas City,
- Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Center for the Study of Rural America.
- Furmankiewicz, M., N. Thompson, and M. Zielinska. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ . Area-Based Partnerships in Rural Poland: The Post-Accession Experience. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£Č ( ’£▒ ): ’£Ą’£▓ -’£Č’£▓ .
- Gadsby, D. M. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . Resource Conservation and Development Program Reaches a Milestone. Rural America ’£▒’£Ę ( ’£┤ ): ’£Ą’£░ -’£Ą’£┤ .
- Goodwin, M. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė . The Governance of Rural Areas: Some Emerging Research Issues and Agendas. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▒’£┤ ( ’£▒ ): ’£Ą’£░’£▒’£▓ .
- Hamin, E. M., and D. J. Marcucci. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ė . Ad Hoc Rural Regionalism. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£┤ ( ’£┤ ): ’£┤’£Č’£Ę -’£┤’£Ę’£Ę .
- Harrison, J. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č . Re-Reading the New Regionalism: A Sympathetic Critique. Space and Polity ’£▒’£░ ( ’£▒ ): ’£▓’£▒ -’£┤’£Č .
- Harvey, D. C., H. Hawkins, and N. J. Thomas. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ . Regional Imaginaries of Governance Agencies: Practising the Region of South West Britain. Environment and Planning A ’£┤’£│ ( ’£▓ ): ’£┤’£Ę’£░ -’£┤’£Ė’£Č .
- Heaton, K. ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ . E-mail correspondence with John Jacobs. March.
- Higgins, V., and G. Lawrence. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . Globalization and Agricultural Governance. In Agricultural Governance: Globalization and the New Politics of Regulation, edited by V . Higgins and G. Lawrence, ’£▒ -’£▒’£Č . New York: Routledge.
- Higgins, V., and S. Lockie. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . Re-Discovering the Social: New-Liberalism and Hybrid Practices of Governing in Rural Natural Resource Management. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▒’£Ė ( ’£┤ ): ’£┤’£▒’£╣ -’£┤’£▓’£Ė .
- Hobbs, D. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ą . Capacity Building: Reexamining the Role of the Rural School. In Investing in People: The Human Capital Needs of Rural America, edited  by  L.  J.  Beaulieu  and  D. Mulkey, ’£▓’£Ą’£╣ -’£▓’£Ė’£┤ . Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press.
- Jessop, B. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ę . A Neo-Gramscian Approach to the Regulation of Urban Regimes. In Reconstructing Urban Regime Theory: Regulating Urban Politics in a Global Economy, edited by M. Lauria, ’£Ą’£▒ -’£Ę’£│ . London: Sage.
- ---. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ . Narrating the Future of the National Economy and the National State? Remarks on ReMapping Regulation and Re-Inventing Governance. In State/Culture: State Formation after the Cultural Turn, edited by G. Steinmetz, ’£│’£Ę’£Ė -’£┤’£░’£Ą . Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
- ---. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . The Future of the Capitalist State . Cambridge, U.K.: Polity Press.
- Johnson, N. ’£▒’£╣’£Ę’£╣ . Quangos and the Structure of British Government. Public Administration ’£Ą’£Ę ( ’£┤ ): ’£│’£Ę’£╣ -’£│’£╣’£Ą .
- Jonas, A. E. G., and S. Pincetl. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č . Rescaling Regions in the State: The New Regionalism in California. Political Geography ’£▓’£Ą ( ’£Ą ): ’£┤’£Ė’£▓ -’£Ą’£░’£Ą .
- Juhl, D. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . E-mail correspondence with John Jacobs. March.
- KGS [Kansas Geological Survey]. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę . Generalized Physiographic Map of Kansas. Lawrence: Kansas Geological Survey. [ftp://ftp-fc.sc.egov.usda.gov/KS/Outgoing/Web\_Files/About\_Us/profiles /ks\_physiography.pdf].
- Little, J. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ . New Rural Governance. Progress in Human Geography ’£▓’£Ą ( ’£▒ ): ’£╣’£Ę -’£▒’£░’£▓ .
- Lu, M. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ . Ad Hoc Regionalism in Rural Development. Geographical Review ’£▒’£░’£▒ ( ’£│ ): ’£│’£│’£┤ -’£│’£Ą’£▓ .
- MacLeod, G. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ . New Regionalism Reconsidered: Globalization and the Remaking of Political Economic Space. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research ’£▓’£Ą ( ’£┤ ): ’£Ė’£░’£┤ -’£Ė’£▓’£╣ .
- Marsden, T. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė . New Rural Territories: Regulating the Differentiated Rural Spaces. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▒’£┤ ( ’£▒ ): ’£▒’£░’£Ę -’£▒’£▒’£Ę .
- Marshall, R. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ . Rural Policy in the New Century. International Regional Science Review ’£▓’£┤ ( ’£▒ ): ’£Ą’£╣ -’£Ė’£│ . Murdoch, J., and S. Abram. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ė . Defining the Limits of Community Governance. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▒’£┤ ( ’£▒ ): ’£┤’£▒ -’£Ą’£░ .
- Murdoch, J., and N. Ward. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£Ę . Governmentality and Territoriality: The Statistical Manufacture of Britain's 'National Farm.' Political Geography ’£▒’£Č ( ’£┤ ): ’£│’£░’£Ę -’£│’£▓’£┤ .
- NARC&amp; D C [National Association of Resource Conservation &amp; Development Councils]. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . A Guidebook for RC&amp;D Directors. Washington, D.C.: National Association of Resource Conservation &amp; Development Councils. [www.varcd.org/images/guidebook.pdf].
- ---. ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ . Program for the ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ National Association of Resource Conservation and Development Councils, Triennial Conference, June ’£▒’£┤ -’£▒’£Ę , Albuquerque, New Mexico. Formerly at [www .rcdnet.org/storage/publications/guidebooks/ ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ NatlConfProgram.pdf].

- Norris-Baker, C. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ . Aging on the Old Frontier and the New: A Behavioral Setting Approach to the Declining Small Towns of the Midwest. Environment and Behavior ’£│’£▒ ( ’£▓ ): ’£▓’£┤’£░ -’£▓’£Ą’£Ė .
- NRC [National Research Council]. ’£▒’£╣’£╣’£╣ . Our Common Journey: A Transition toward Sustainability. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
- NRCS [Natural Resources Conservation Service]. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę . Kansas Resource Conservation and Development (RC&amp;D) Areas. Salina, Kans.: Natural Resources Conservation Service.
- ---. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ . Resource Conservation and Development Program: Program Description .  Formerly at [www.nrcs.usda.gov/programs/rcd/pdf\_files/RcdPrDes.pdf].
- Pemberton, S., and M. Goodwin. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£░ . Rethinking the Changing Structures of Rural Local Government ’ø× State Power, Rural Politics and Local Political Strategies? Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£Č ( ’£│ ): ’£▓’£Ę’£▓ -’£▓’£Ė’£│ .
- Pemberton, S., and D. Shaw. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▓ . New Forms of Sub-Regional Governance and Implications for Rural Areas: Evidence from England. Planning Practice &amp; Research ’£▓’£Ę ( ’£┤ ): ’£┤’£┤’£▒ -’£┤’£Ą’£Ė .
- Pezzini, M. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▒ . Rural Policy Lessons from OECD Countries. International Regional Science Review ’£▓’£┤ ( ’£▒ ): ’£▒’£│’£┤ -’£▒’£┤’£Ą .
- Porter, D. R., and A. D. Wallis. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . Exploring Ad Hoc Regionalism . Cambridge, Mass: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. [www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/PubDetail.aspx?pubid= ’£Ę’£░’£Ą ].
- Quigley, J. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . Rural Policy and the New Regional Economics: Implications for Rural America. In The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America, ’£Ę -’£▓’£Ę . Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Center for the Study of Rural America.
- Ru├Łz, A. G., E. Hes, and K. Schwartz. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▒ . Shifting Governance Modes in Wetland Management: A Case Study of Two Wetlands in Bogot├Ī, Colombia. Environment and Planning C: Government and Polity ’£▓’£╣ ( ’£Č ): ’£╣’£╣’£░ -’£▒’£░’£░’£│ .
- Schmidt, M. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . E-mail correspondence with John Jacobs. March.
- Stanley, K. G., T. K. Marsden, and P. Milbourne. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . Governance, Rurality, and Nature: Exploring Emerging Discourses of State Forestry in Britain. Environment and Planning C: Government and Polity ’£▓’£│ ( ’£Ą ): ’£Č’£Ę’£╣ -’£Č’£╣’£Ą .
- Stark, N. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Č . Eight Principles for Effective Rural Governance . . . and How Communities Put Them into Practice. [www.rupri.org/Forms/RGIreport.pdf].
- Summers, G. F. ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£Č . Rural Community Development. Annual Review of Sociology ’£▒’£▓ : ’£│’£┤’£Ę -’£│’£Ę’£▒ .
- USDA [United States Department of Agriculture]. ’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£╣ . National RC&amp;D Manual. ’£▓ nd ed. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- ---. ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ . USDA Commits Historic Resources to Conservation on Private Working Lands. News release No. ’£░’£▓’£▓’£Ą . ’£░’£▓ .  [www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?contentidonly=true&amp;contentid = ’£▓’£░’£░’£▓ / ’£░’£Č / ’£░’£▓’£▓’£Ą .html].
- Walter, O. ’£▓’£░’£▒’£▓ . President's Message. National Catalyst, June (National Conference ed.), ’£▓ . Formerly at [www.narcdc.org/the-catalyst ’ø× -spring-’£▓’£░’£▒’£▓ -issue.html].
- Ward, N., and D. L. Brown. ’£▓’£░’£░’£╣ . Placing the Rural in Regional Development. Regional Studies ’£┤’£│ ( ’£▒’£░ ): ’£▒’£▓’£│’£Ę -’£▒’£▓’£┤’£┤ .
- Warner, K. D. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ę . The Quality of Sustainability: Agroecological Partnerships and the Geographic Branding of California Winegrapes. Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£│ ( ’£▓ ): ’£▒’£┤’£▓ -’£▒’£Ą’£Ą .
- Wilson, G. A. ’£▓’£░’£░’£┤ . The Australian Landcare Movement: Towards 'Post-Productivist' Rural Governance? Journal of Rural Studies ’£▓’£░ ( ’£┤ ): ’£┤’£Č’£▒ -’£┤’£Ė’£┤ .
- Wiskerke, J. S. C., B. B. Bock, M. Stuiver, and H. Renting. ’£▓’£░’£░’£│ . Environmental Co-Operatives as a New Mode of Rural Governance. NJAS Wageningen Journal of Life Sciences ’£Ą’£▒ ( ’£▒ -’£▓ ): ’£╣ -’£▓’£Ą .
- Wuthnow, R. ’£▓’£░’£░’£Ą . Depopulation and Rural Churches in Kansas, ’£▒’£╣’£Ą’£░ -’£▒’£╣’£Ė’£░ . Great Plains Research ’£▒’£Ą ( ’£▒ ): ’£▒’£▒’£Ę -’£▒’£│’£┤ .