## Spatial Patterns of Migration and Income Change in the Mountain West: The Dominance of Service-Based, Amenity-Rich Counties

## J. Matthew Shumway and Samuel M. Otterstrom

Brigham Young University

One of the most recognizable and important changes occurring in the West is rapid population growth. This article intends to address questions associated with whether patterns of population growth and income migration are associated with 'new' and 'old' West economies. Rural restructuring in the U.S. has created a group of counties with service-based economies. In the Mountain West, a number of counties with service-based economies are located in areas with high levels of environmental or natural amenities, creating what has been termed the 'New West.' Migration to the rural parts of the Mountain West, and the income transfers associated with migration, are increasingly concentrated within these New West counties. Rapid population growth, the changing characteristics of in-migrants, and their spatial concentration in New West counties provide a basis for conflicts over what the rural West is becoming. Key Words: environmental amenities, income migration, New West.

ike  most places, the western United States defies easy description, categorization, or understanding.  The  western  U.S.  (hereafter the 'West') is both a place and a process. It is a place populated by real people who live, graze cattle, write software, irrigate crops, mountain bike, ski, drive cars, migrate into and out of the region and debate what the West is. The West is also a process or phase in American historythe embodiment of the nation's last frontier, or the image of American manifest destiny. Donald Snow  (1998,  1)  captures  the  juxtaposition  of place and process: '[the West is] a region that seems  always  to  be  becoming  but  never  finished, a place in perpetual motion, always traveling, never arriving.' L

One of the most important discussions now occurring in the West concerns one such transformation: the evolution of the rural economy from one oriented around extractive industries (ranching,  farming,  mining,  logging)  to  one based on preservation of environmental amenities (tourism, retirement, and second homes and the services that go along with these economic  activities).  A  correlate  of  the  current transformation is population change. Population change represents more than a simple redistribution of people; it is an indicator and, in many instances, an instigator of a wide range of economic, social, cultural, political/policy, and environmental transformations.

Recent research, including that by Rudzitis (1998), Nelson and Beyers (1998), Vias (1999), and Shumway and Davis (1996), has addressed the shifting regional economy and population change in the West. These studies have focused on the dichotomy in rural areas between what has  been  labeled  the  Old  West  and  the  New West. The Old West is characterized by extractive  activities,  as  well  as  expenditures  by  the federal  government  (on  dams,  power  plants, military facilities, and so on). In contrast, the New West is characterized by environmental amenities, recreation-based economies, and retirement communities. This reported shift has had  an  effect  on  the  perception  of  what  the West  was  and  is  (Rudzitis  1996,  1998;  Riebsame 1997). The identity of the West, particularly its rural parts, and the notion of that rural West  as  a  place  with  a  particular  identitywhether  fictional  or  not-are  shifting  along with economic, land-use, sociocultural, and demographic characteristics.

The purpose of this article is twofold. First, we  want  to  determine  what  spatial  patterns stem from the restructuring of the rural West economy from old to new and find out if rapid population growth is associated with the suggested  economic transformations-that is, to what extent are patterns of population change associated with New West economies? Second, we want to examine how recent migration pat-

terns into the rural West are changing patterns of income concentration and distribution.

## Rural Restructuring and the Environmental Model of Development

According to Galston and Baehler (1995), during the 1980s and into the 1990s, increased international  competition  in  both  natural  resource  commodities  and  manufactured  goods lowered the real prices of natural resources, decreased the importance of primary  goods within  the  national  economy,  and  decreased the amount and/or limited the spread of ruralbased manufacturing in the U.S. Such restructuring has affected types of employment opportunities for rural residents. Brown and Deavers (1988)  and  Summers,  Horton,  and  Gringeri (1990) document a decline in employment in extractive industries producing primary goods in rural areas, some highly selective growth in manufacturing, and enormous growth in services. McGranahan and colleagues (1986) categorize  most  of  this  growth  in  service  sector employment as 'household-oriented' services, including  health  care,  education,  retail  trade, personal  services,  entertainment,  and  recreation. Beyers and Nelson (Beyers 1991; Nelson and Beyers 1998; Beyers and Nelson 2000) has found  that  export-oriented  producer  services and  professional  services  are  also  important employment growth categories for rural areas. As a result of rural restructuring, employment in many rural areas has shifted from employment in extractive industries  to  primarily  servicebased  employment, both household and producer services.

Power (1994, 1996) and Rasker (1993, 1995) have argued that these shifts do not simply reflect  period  effects-unique  events  that  have coalesced at this specific time-but rather indicate a fundamental structural transformation of the rural West's economy. According to these writers, the basis for future economic growth and development lies, not with the exploitation of natural resources, but with the exploitation of the natural environment as a place. The principal driving force in this new economy is environmental  quality.  Environmental  quality  is encapsulated in such items as an unspoiled natural  environment,  recreational  opportunities, cultural richness, reasonable costs of living, safe communities, and quality public services. Such amenities attract highly skilled labor and entrepreneurs  (Rudzitis  1998).  They  also  attract retirees and tourists, creating demands for additional services. These processes then create additional economic activity, which is cumulative and which provides the fuel to perpetuate continued economic viability.

Research from Rudzitis and his associates reinforces this environmental model of economic growth. Using primary data from surveys, they have found that recent migrants to the region increasingly  indicate  that  social  and  natural amenities and overall quality of life factors are more important determinants of their moves to rural areas in the West than more direct economic factors such as employment and income (Rudzitis  1989,  1991,  1993;  von  Reichart  and Rudzitis 1992, 1994). Such amenity factors are also important in keeping people in these places, dampening out-migration tendencies and rates (Rudzitis  and  Streatfield  1993)  and  thus  increasing local population growth. Vias (1999) found  that  population  growth  is  driving  employment in rural counties in the West, not the other way around. In other words, jobs are following  people,  rather  than  people  following jobs.  Lorah  (2000)  found  that  counties  with designated  wilderness  areas,  national  parks, and so forth had significantly higher levels of population growth than those in counties that did not have any of these natural amenities. Environmental amenities and quality of life factors  appear  to  be  important  determinants  of population change and employment growth in some rural western communities.

We intend to pursue three main questions. First,  which  counties  in  the  rural  Mountain West are New West in nature? Second, is net migration  into  the  rural  Mountain  West  increasing or decreasing geographical concentration  within  high-amenity  counties?  Finally, does the environmental model of development selectively draw higher-income individuals, to the extent that this model can sustain rural development in rural western communities?

## Population and Income Concentration in the Rural West

If, as has been argued, the new rural economy of the Mountain West follows the environmental model of development, population growth

in  rural  counties  should  be  concentrating  in those  counties  with  growing  amenity  economies, rather than those in traditional Old West, extractive-based  economies. Before this comparison can be made, the New West must first be  identified.  In  order  to  determine  this  we used a data-clustering technique to show which counties  are  closely  related  to  each  other  in terms of their economic and other geographic characteristics.

## Defining the New West

In this case, we defined the rural West as those counties in the U.S. Mountain Census Division designated  as  rural  (nonmetropolitan)  as  of 1993 based on the rural/urban codes developed by Butler and Beale (1994). Using these codes, we selected a total of 246 rural counties. Once counties were designated as rural, we used the Economic Research Service (ERS) county typology  codes  as  a  framework  for  examining county level economic structure (Cook 1994). These codes include six mutually exclusive economic types-farming, mining, manufacturing, government,  services,  and  nonspecialized-as well as a number of overlapping policy types, including  a  retirement  designation.  We  also used  the  ERS's  natural  amenity  index,  which includes  factors  measuring  aspects  of  climate, topography, and water (McGranahan 1999). We also added a set of measures developed by Beale and  Johnson  (1998)  to  determine  recreationbased economies.

Using  continuous  versions  of  the  typology variables along with the natural amenities index and the recreation measures as our clustering criteria, we performed a cluster analysis using SPSS k-means clustering procedure. After creating the clusters, we compared and contrasted them along demographic and locational dimensions.  Each  cluster  is  labeled  by  its  dominant economic characteristics. That is, rural counties the economies of which are dominated by farming  income and employment are clustered together  within  the farming cluster.  The  ERS typology structure, the natural amenities index, and the recreation designation contribution to each cluster are shown below Panel B in T able 1. If there is not a strong between-group contrast for these different variables, then the variable does  not  contribute  to  the  formation  of  that cluster. For example, the counties in the farm-

Table 1 Population Growth and Demographic Characteristics in the Rural Mountain West

|                                                              | Government (38 Counties)                                     | NewWest (76 Counties)                                        | Diversified (29 Counties)                                    | Mining/ Manufacturing (55 Counties)                          | Farming (48 Counties)                                        |                                                              |
|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|
| Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 | Panel A: Population Growth in Rural Mountain West, 1990-1999 |
| Population size, 1990                                        | 3,798,132                                                    |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Population size, 1999                                        | 4,525,847                                                    |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Population increase                                          | 727,715                                                      |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Percent increase                                             | 18                                                           |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Increase from net migration                                  | 436,629                                                      |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Percent increase from net migration                          | 60                                                           |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Percent of counties with net in-migration                    | 72                                                           |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |                                                              |
| Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type | Panel B: Average Demographic Characteristics by Cluster Type |
| Population size*                                             | 22,544                                                       | 27,108                                                       | 9,354                                                        | 18,092                                                       | 7,544                                                        |                                                              |
| Population change (1990-1999)*                               | 2,327                                                        | 5,573                                                        | 981                                                          | 1,964                                                        | 711                                                          |                                                              |
| %Population change (1990-1999)*                              | 9.3                                                          | 26.1                                                         | 12.7                                                         | 11.9                                                         | 5.5                                                          |                                                              |
| Net domestic migration*                                      | 196                                                          | 3,943                                                        | 501                                                          | 625                                                          | 248                                                          |                                                              |
| Net international migration*                                 | 189                                                          | 331                                                          | 137                                                          | 153                                                          | 102                                                          |                                                              |
| Natural increase (%)*                                        | 5.2                                                          | 5.8                                                          | 3.6                                                          | 5.9                                                          | 2.8                                                          |                                                              |
| Median income (1995)*                                        | $27,814                                                      | $33,158                                                      | $25,621                                                      | $32,490                                                      | $27,234                                                      |                                                              |
| %adjacent to metro county                                    | 24                                                           | 32                                                           | 24                                                           | 12                                                           | 18                                                           |                                                              |

Note: Cluster classification contribution: New West (natural amenities, federal land ownership, recreation destination, service employment/income, retirement destination); Government (government employment/income, federal land ownership); Diversified (agriculture employment/income, natural amenities, commuting, recreation destination); Farming (agriculture employment/income, commuting); Mining/Manufacturing (mining, manufacturing employment/income).

*Significant at .05 level.

ing  cluster  are  not  significantly  differentiated by any other employment sector (although they are differentiated by commuting as well), whereas the cluster labeled 'mining and manufacturing' is  significantly  differentiated  by  both  mining and manufacturing from the other clusters (see Fig. 1 and T able 1, Panel B). New West counties have  the  highest  natural  amenity  index,  the highest amount of employment in and income derived from services, and the highest percentages of federal land ownership, and are major retirement and recreation destinations.

Figure  1  illustrates  the  various  classes  of counties in the Mountain West. Of special note

Figure 1 Categorization of rural counties in the Mountain West.

<!-- image -->

are  the  counties  in  the  New  West  category. These  counties  are  found  in  every  state,  but they  are  concentrated  in  areas  where  a  more developed  infrastructure  has  combined  with extant recreational and scenic amenities to encourage a high degree of growth. The most intense clustering (in number, as opposed to population size) of these New West counties is in western  Colorado,  southern  Wyoming,  and northern  New  Mexico,  where  many  famous destinations, proximity to metropolitan areas, and  other  amenities  continue  to  attract  migrants (e.g., T elluride, Steamboat Springs, Aspen,  and  T aos).  Similar  clusters  are  found  in western  Montana,  western  Wyoming,  northern Arizona, and western Nevada. These areas also exhibit their recreational nature with large resorts and/or national parks and other federal lands.  Additionally,  warm-weather  retirement destinations are apparent in Arizona, southern New Mexico, and Washington County, Utah.

In sum, Figure 1 highlights a New West comprised of places about which people nationwide are more likely to know and to which they are more  likely  to  be  attracted  because  of  their amenities and status. The other rural classifications contain few counties that those outside of the state or region would recognize. Mud Lake, Idaho is not the same as Sun Valley. Glenrock, Wyoming has fewer movie stars than Jackson Hole. Winnemucca, Nevada, Randolph, Utah, and  Holbrook,  Arizona  just  do  not  have  the recreational draw of a Lake T ahoe, Moab, or Sedona.

In the first panel of T able 1, we provide some simple  descriptive  information  on  population change in the rural Mountain West throughout the  1990s.  This  data  comes  from  the  county population  estimates  from  the  U.S.  Census Bureau (1997). The rural Mountain West population  grew  by  over  700,000  people  in  the 1990s, with approximately sixty percent of that growth coming from net in-migration to the region. Additionally, over seventy percent of rural counties in the Mountain West experienced net in-migration,  which  suggests  that  population growth may not be spatially focused on a relatively small set of high-amenity counties. The next two sections explore this in more depth.

## Population Concentration

The  clustering  procedure  makes  clear  that  a significant  number  of  rural  Mountain  West counties  have  economic  structures  along  the lines  of  Power's  (1994,  1996)  environmental model  of  development.  These  New  West counties rank high on the ERS amenity scale, are retirement and recreation destinations, and are characterized by service-based economies. Panel B in T able 1 presents the results from the clustering  strategy,  along  with  some  demographic  and  locational  characteristics  of  each cluster. New West counties have the largest populations, the largest average population growth (about six times the amount of in-migration as the next largest category) and the highest median income. Even though all groups of counties have had some population growth due to net in-migration, population growth appears to be concentrated within New West counties.

In order to test this further, we calculated a Hoover  index,  which  measures  spatial  focus (see Long and Nucci 1997a), for 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 1999 for the entire continuously rural Mountain West. We then calculated the index for each category type over the same time periods. The Hoover index is

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where Ht is the Hoover index at time t , pit is the proportion of population in area i at time t , and ai is the proportion of land in area i. The index would be 0 if each area had the same proportion of land and population; it would be 100 if everyone lived in a single area. Essentially, the index tells us the percentage of the total population  that  would  have  to  move  in  order  to achieve equal densities in each area. Population deconcentration occurs when there is a decline in the index over time. Deconcentration results from either below-average growth in units of analysis-counties, in this case-with higherthan-average density or above-average growth in  counties  with  lower-than-average  densities (Long and Nucci 1997a). Population concentration happens when the opposite scenario occurs. The  principal  use  of  the  index  is  to  identify whether population trends  exhibit  tendencies toward more uniform distributions or whether they serve to focus population in a more concentrated pattern (Plane and Rogerson 1994). Knowing that current and incoming population is not evenly distributed among all rural counties, we want to see how it varies within our typology.

Panel A of T able 2 shows the Hoover index for  all  continuously  rural  counties  and  the

changes in the index between 1950 and 1999. Examination of the Hoover index over time indicates that the rural Mountain West population is  becoming  increasingly  concentrated.  As  of 1999, almost 42 percent of the population residing in rural counties in the Mountain West would have to move in order to have equal population densities. As would be expected, the smallest level of concentration occurred in the 1970s, during the population turnaround or rural renaissance. The 1980s saw the largest increase in population concentration, which corresponds with the trends found in other regions of the U.S. (Long and Nucci 1997a). However, during the 1990s, population concentration continued at a rather quick pace. In fact, this decade saw the second largest  increase  in  population  concentration since 1950. This is surprising, given the 'rural rebound' in the U.S. during the 1990s (Fuguitt and Beale 1996; Long and Nucci 1997b).

Panel B of T able 2 shows the Hoover index disaggregated  by  type  of  county  group.  The New West cluster is the only group that has Hoover values over 10 as well as decadal increases  in  concentration  of  at  least  0.50.  In other words, New West counties have the largest degree of population concentration among all the county groups, as well as being the only group of counties  to  have  relatively  large  and  continued population concentration. For the other county groups,  the  small  amount  of  changes  in  the Hoover values over the nearly fifty years studied underlines both the relatively low populations  of  these  counties  and  the  fairly  stable

Table 2 Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West

|                                                                                           | 1950                                                                                      | 1960                                                                                      | 1970                                                                                      | 1980                                                                                      | 1990                                                                                      | 1999                                                                                      |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         | Panel A: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties, 1950-1999                         |
| Nonmetro counties                                                                         | 35.86                                                                                     | 37.17                                                                                     | 38.44                                                                                     | 38.59                                                                                     | 40.50                                                                                     | 41.88                                                                                     |
| Change in Hoover values                                                                   |                                                                                           | 1.31                                                                                      | 1.27                                                                                      | .15                                                                                       | 1.91                                                                                      | 1.38                                                                                      |
| Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 | Panel B: Hoover Index for Rural Mountain West Counties by Type of County Group, 1950-1999 |
| County Group                                                                              |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |
| Government                                                                                | 7.49                                                                                      | 7.41                                                                                      | 7.72                                                                                      | 7.34                                                                                      | 7.19                                                                                      | 7.07                                                                                      |
| New West                                                                                  | 10.63                                                                                     | 11.12                                                                                     | 12.15                                                                                     | 13.16                                                                                     | 14.46                                                                                     | 15.81                                                                                     |
| Diversified                                                                               | 4.19                                                                                      | 3.83                                                                                      | 3.87                                                                                      | 3.83                                                                                      | 3.51                                                                                      | 3.43                                                                                      |
| Mining/Manufacturing                                                                      | 9.04                                                                                      | 10.20                                                                                     | 9.93                                                                                      | 9.32                                                                                      | 9.60                                                                                      | 9.72                                                                                      |
| Farming                                                                                   | 4.88                                                                                      | 4.93                                                                                      | 5.08                                                                                      | 5.22                                                                                      | 5.33                                                                                      | 5.57                                                                                      |
|                                                                                           |                                                                                           | 1950-1960                                                                                 | 1960-1970                                                                                 | 1970-1980                                                                                 | 1980-1990                                                                                 | 1990-1999                                                                                 |
| Change in Hoovers                                                                         |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |                                                                                           |
| Government                                                                                |                                                                                           | - 0.09                                                                                    | 0.31                                                                                      | - 0.37                                                                                    | - 0.15                                                                                    | - 0.12                                                                                    |
| New West                                                                                  |                                                                                           | 0.50                                                                                      | 1.03                                                                                      | 1.00                                                                                      | 1.30                                                                                      | 1.35                                                                                      |
| Diversified                                                                               |                                                                                           | - 0.36                                                                                    | 0.04                                                                                      | - 0.05                                                                                    | - 0.32                                                                                    | - 0.08                                                                                    |
| Mining/Manufacturing                                                                      |                                                                                           | 1.16                                                                                      | - 0.27                                                                                    | - 0.61                                                                                    | 0.28                                                                                      | 0.11                                                                                      |
| Farming                                                                                   |                                                                                           | 0.05                                                                                      | 0.15                                                                                      | 0.14                                                                                      | 0.10                                                                                      | 0.24                                                                                      |

nature of their populations. The very low Hoover values across all of the county groups also indicate a dispersed or evenly distributed population among each group of counties. This means that the population densities within each of the groups are more uniform than they are when all of the counties are analyzed together as the rural  Mountain  West  (see  T able  2,  Panel  B). The aggregated  region  exhibits  much  higher Hoover values (more concentration) over time than the individual grouped types. This stems from the increasing concentration occurring in New West counties in comparison with the other county groups, and it indicates that the clustering technique used to differentiate the county groups succeeded in grouping counties of similar economic base and population density.

## Patterns of Income Migration

After  discovering  the  relatively  unequal  patterns of the observed migration flows creating an increasingly concentrated pattern of population, we became interested in how such concentrations might affect the various county groups in  terms  of  the  selective  characteristics  of  migrants to each county group. Additionally, one of the principal elements of the environmental/ amenity model of economic development is a belief  that,  if  local  economic  development planners and policy makers focus on environmental quality, this will selectively draw individuals  with  relatively  high  income,  and  thus provide the basis for future economic sustainability. We wanted to find out if this was in fact

the case, at least in terms of increasing the income base of the local area.

One  of  the  difficulties  with  exploring  this issue-and,  indeed,  any  question  that  deals with migration-lies in finding adequate data. All  of  the  population  change  and  migration data used in this article comes from estimates prepared by the U.S. Census Bureau. Because most of the growth in the rural West has occurred  since  1990,  the  decennial  census  does not  provide  sufficient  information  to  model migration patterns post-1990, much less examine  the  impacts  of  such  migration.  T o  overcome this  problem,  following  Cromartie  and Nord (1997) and Plane (1999), we use the recently released IRS/Census migration files distributed by the Internal Revenue Service (U.S. IRS).  In  order  to  avoid  problems  associated with using only a single year of data, we average the data over a three-year period using 19941995,  1995-1996,  and  1996-1997  data  files (see Cromartie and Nord 1997 and Plane 1999 for a detailed discussion of this data set).

It is not just the total number of individuals and families migrating into the rural West and where they are concentrating that are important in understanding the effect of in-migration on local changes; it is also the characteristics of the  migrants.  The  selectivity  of  who  moves where  and  how  such  selective  characteristics compare  to  out-migrants  and  nonmigrants have at least as much impact as the total numbers of in-, out-, and nonmigrants. Cromartie and Nord (1997) suggest that migrants moving into high-amenity rural areas have higher incomes  than  either  out-migrants  from  these same  counties  or  nonmigrants.  Plane  (1999) shows the important role that retirement migration  plays  in  the  growth  of  aggregate  and per capita income by region in the U.S.

Are these New West counties in which population  is  concentrating  becoming  richer  due to the selectivity of migration? Migration can change the relative income among these coun- ties in two ways. First, if more people move to a specific county than leave it, there will be a net transfer  of  income,  assuming  that  the  average income of both in- and out-migrants is equal. Second, the per capita incomes of in- and outmigrants may be different. If in-migrants have higher  per  capita  incomes  than  out-migrants, there will also be a net transfer of income. We expect  that  migrants  moving  to  New  West counties  will  have  higher  per  capita  incomes than  out-migrants,  and  therefore  New  West counties will gain income from both the total number and income characteristics of inmigrants. In order to test this expectation, we use  the  income  efficiency  and  decomposition measures  on  the  IRS/Census  data  used  by Plane (1999).

Table  3  reveals  the  average  per  capita  incomes of nonmigrants, in-migrants, and outmigrants  averaged  for  each  county  grouping over the three one-year periods outlined above. There  is  a  considerable  amount  of  variation among  these  county  groups.  In-migrants  to New West counties have the highest per capita incomes, while in-migrants to farming counties have the lowest per capita incomes. On average,  out-migrants  from  New  West  counties had the highest incomes of any group of outmigrants.  As  T able  3  shows,  in-migrants  to New West  counties  have  higher  average  per capita incomes than either out-migrants from or nonmigrants in New West counties.

The last two columns of T able 3 show the percentage of in- and out-migrant income compared to  that  of  nonmigrants  for  each  county  group. For all counties, the income of in-migrants is 98 percent  of  nonmigrants,  while  that  of  outmigrants  is  only  90  percent  of  nonmigrants. Breaking this down by category reveals that inmigrants  to  New  West  and  nonspecialized counties  have  higher  incomes  than  those  of nonmigrant residents of those county groups. In  all  other  cases,  both  in-and  out-migrants have  lower  per  capita  incomes  than  nonmi-

Table 3 Per Capita Income Levels of Rural Mountain West Nonmigrants, In-migrants, and Out-migrants

| County Group         | Nonmigrants   | In-migrants   | Out-migrants   |   In-migrants (%) |   Out-migrants (%) |
|----------------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| Government           | $11,460       | $10,846       | $10,121        |                96 |                 90 |
| New West             | $14,996       | $15,451       | $12,646        |               104 |                 86 |
| Diversified          | $9,971        | $10,268       | $9,374         |               105 |                 96 |
| Mining/Manufacturing | $12,120       | $11,081       | $10,966        |                92 |                 91 |
| Farming              | $10,586       | $9,626        | $9,748         |                92 |                 93 |
| All counties         | $12,354       | $12,015       | $10,929        |                98 |                 90 |

Table 4 Aggregate County Migration Income in Thousands of Dollars, and an Income-Migration Effectiveness Measure

| County Group         | In-migrant Income   | Out-migrant Income   | Net Migration Income   | Effectiveness   |
|----------------------|---------------------|----------------------|------------------------|-----------------|
| Government           | $15,705             | $15,211              | $494                   | 1.01            |
| New West             | $33,770             | $23,302              | $10,468                | 17.68           |
| Diversified          | $5,920              | $4,999               | $921                   | 9.21            |
| Mining/Manufacturing | $11,961             | $11,002              | $960                   | 4.68            |
| Farming              | $4,751              | $4,301               | $450                   | - 0.51          |
| All counties         | $17,158             | $13,437              | $3,721                 | 7.65            |

grants,  which  is  similar  to  what  Plane  (1999) found for state-to-state migration in the U.S.

Table 4 presents gross and net shifts in migration income over the three-year period by county grouping. The first two columns represent  total  aggregate  income  (in  thousands  of dollars)  for  in-  and  out-migrants.  For  each county group, the figure in the in-migrant income column represents a 'gain' to the county group, the figure in the out-migrant income column represents a 'loss' to other counties, and the figure in the net migration income column represents the net gain or loss of aggregate income by the county group due to migration. All county groups-although not all counties within each category-experienced a net gain in aggregate  income.  Rural  counties  in  the  Mountain West had an average aggregate income transfer of 3.7 million dollars per county-a total transfer of almost one billion dollars. Approximately 87 percent of the gain in total aggregate income over  the  three-year  time  period  was  concentrated in New West counties. The net aggregate income gain was approximately ten million dollars  per  county  for  New West counties, versus slightly less than one million per county for the next highest group (mining/manufacturing).

The  last  column  of  T able  4  is  an  incomemigration effectiveness measure. This measure controls  for  the  different  population  sizes  of the county groups, and is thus a better measure of  the  impact  of  income  transfers  than  is  net aggregate income. Income-migration effectiveness is defined as the percentage ratio of the net to the total amount of aggregate income accruing to in-and out-migrants (see Plane 1999). As can be seen in the last column of T able 4, New West counties have the most highly effective income gains, with almost twice the increase of the next highest county group (nonspecialized).

Table  5  decomposes  aggregate  income  into two components: a net migration component, showing  aggregate  income  change  due  to  net change in number of migrants (assuming similar levels of income between in- and out-migrants); and a differential income component, showing how much aggregate county income change is due to differences in per capita income between in- and out-migrants (controlling for total net population change due to migration). All of the county  groupings  have  positive  change  from both the net migration component and the differential income component. On balance, it is the  magnitude  of  net  migration  to  the  rural Mountain West that is driving income change. For example, only for the government county group was the differential income component stronger than the net migration component. In New West counties, approximately 45 percent of the total net aggregate income change is attributable  to  income  differences  between  inand out-migrants. This percentage drops to 40 percent for the nonspecialized counties, 17 percent  for  the  mining/manufacturing  counties,

Table 5 Changes in Aggregate Income by Net Migration and Differential Income Components

| County Group         | Net Migration Component   | Differential Income Component   | Total        |
|----------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------|--------------|
| Government           | $3,347,826                | $15,407,451                     | $18,755,277  |
| New West             | $436,146,184              | $359,431,034                    | $795,577,218 |
| Diversified          | $16,115,033               | $10,603,636                     | $26,718,669  |
| Mining/Manufacturing | $43,858,644               | $8,922,324                      | $52,780,968  |
| Farming              | $18,275,522               | $3,316,322                      | $21,591,843  |
| All counties         | $517,743,208              | $397,680,767                    | $915,423,975 |

and 15 percent for the farming counties. This supports the proposition that the environmental model of development does selectively draw migrants with high incomes, although it is still the total number of new migrants that has the largest effect on income change.

In examining the Hoover index and the various measures of income change, we have seen that, in the Mountain West region, population growth  and  income  are  increasingly  spatially concentrated and that such concentration is focusing on what we have called New West counties. T able 6 presents information on the relative population sizes of each county grouping (average size over the 1994-1997 time period), the  relative  number  of  in-migrants  to  each county group over the three-year time period, and the relative aggregate income gain. Of the approximately 4.5 million people who lived in rural areas in the Mountain West during these years,  45  percent  were  found  in  New  West counties-twice as many as in the next largest county grouping. Eighty-two percent of the migrants  coming  to  the  rural  West  during  the 1994-1997 time period  settled  in  New  West counties.  Eighty-seven  percent  of  the  almost

Table 6 Relative Population Size, In-migrants, and Aggregate Income for Mountain West Counties by County Type, 1994-1997

| County Group         | Total Population Size 1994      | Percent ofTotal   |
|----------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------|
| Government           | 862,623                         | 0.19              |
| New West             | 2,017,043                       | 0.45              |
| Diversified          | 274,926                         | 0.06              |
| Mining/Manufacturing | 1,005,807                       | 0.22              |
| Farming              | 365,448                         | 0.08              |
| All Counties         | 4,525,847                       | 1.00              |
| County Group         | Total In-migrants 1994-1997     | Percent ofTotal   |
| Government           | 825                             | 0.01              |
| New West             | 93,770                          | 0.82              |
| Diversified          | 4,431                           | 0.04              |
| Mining/Manufacturing | 11,762                          | 0.10              |
| Farming              | 3,372                           | 0.03              |
| All Counties         | 114,160                         | 1.00              |
| County Group         | Aggregate Income Gain 1994-1997 | Percent ofTotal   |
| Government           | 18,755,277                      | 0.02              |
| New West             | 795,577,218                     | 0.87              |
| Diversified          | 26,718,669                      | 0.03              |
| Mining/Manufacturing | 52,780,968                      | 0.06              |
| Farming              | 21,591,843                      | 0.02              |
| All Counties         | 915,423,975                     | 1.00              |

one  billion  dollars  of  aggregate  income  gain the rural West experienced during this time period came to New West counties.

The current population distribution is primarily  in  New  West  places.  If  current  trends  continue,  in-migration will continue to reinforce this  pattern.  Of  perhaps  equal  importance,  inmigrants  are  bringing  with  them  significantly more  income,  due  to  the  ratio  of  in-migrants to out-migrants and because the in-migrants to New West counties have higher incomes. If this pattern  persists,  the  rural  Mountain  West  will find  itself  increasingly  divided  between  highamenity and high-income locations and other, less favored locations.

## The Changing West

In this article, we aimed to try to delineate where the New West is, to associate patterns of population growth through migration with our typology, and to see what the impact of in-migration to the region was based on local levels of changing per capita and aggregate income. We were able to successfully identify clusters of counties based on their economic structure and, using the classification scheme, associate increasing population growth with New West counties. These counties  are  attracting  the  greatest  amount  of new in-migrants of all the county groups in the Mountain West region, and this has resulted in higher levels of population concentration in the rural West. The New West has also attracted a disproportionate  share  of  income  associated with net migration, thus providing the basis for potential sustainability of the service-based economies in the New West counties.

Many of the rural counties in the West must cope with shifting employment bases, rapid population growth, and the changing demographic makeup of their populations. The metamorphosis of parts of the rural West from Old to Newwhich includes changes in employment, population  size,  and  demographic  composition-has affected these areas in a number of ways, including engendering conflicts over what the West is or what it ought to be.

They come from all over, modern-day migrants fleeing freeways, smog and crime, yearning for their own little piece of the West. And with each new arrival, there is that much less of the wide open space they all crave. The American West is

torn between two visions of one place. Although many cling desperately to the Old West ethos of a  hardworking  people  who  came  to  tame  the land and tap its wealth, other are just as determined to bring on a New West, where nature is no longer ravaged, but restored. Yet, before the West  can  choose  between  Old  and  New,  this stream of new settlers could doom them both. . . . Amid all the clamor over mining and grazing, grizzlies and wolves, [there is] something more troubling. . . . The single most dramatic resource issue we face, and I mean really immediately, is people. (Diringer 1994, 1)

Like Snow (1997), Robbins (1994) suggests that the West's principal identifying characteristic  is  its  continuity  of  change.  He  identifies three driving forces that have caused and continue to cause change in the West: interaction among (1) the West's 'unique geography,' (2) investment in and exploitation of its natural resources by external capital interests, and (3) the imposition  of  federal  policy.  Robbins  argues that  continuous  change  stems  from  the  rural West's dependent relations with external actors and  institutions  that  represent  the  increasing linkage of economic actors in rural areas to distant, powerful financial and market forces that determine the nature of land use and economic activity  from  outside  the  region.  Thus,  rural change is a spatially variable condition that results from the interaction of place characteristics with  the  processes  that  continually  (re)create such  places.  Such  continuity  of  change  affects employment  patterns,  population  movements, and demographic characteristics of places. For the rural West, this has meant that places have shifted from being areas of production to becoming areas of consumption. This results in a New West in which the importance of mineral, cattle, and lumber production is diminished by an  economy  based  on  a  new  paradigm  of  the amenity  region,  which  creates  increased  demands for amenity space, residential and recreational  property,  second  homes,  and  environmental protection. One result of both changing employment and production/consumption patterns is a changing pattern of population concentration,  population  deconcentration,  and demographic  differences  related  to  selective patterns of in- and out-migration. These processes continue to reshape and reinforce settlement  patterns,  rural  western  landscapes,  and the rural West as a place. /H17039

## Literature Cited

- Beale,  Calvin  L.,  and  Kenneth  M.  Johnson.  1998. The identification of recreational counties in nonmetropolitan areas of the United States. Population Research and Policy Review 17:37-53.

Beyers, William B. 1991. Trends in service employment in Pacific Northwest counties: 1974-1986. Growth and Change 22:28-50.

Beyers, William B., and Peter B. Nelson. 2000. Contemporary development forces in the nonmetropolitan West: New insights from rapidly growing communities. Journal of Rural Studies 16 (4):459-74.

- Brown,  David  L.,  and  Kenneth  L.  Deavers.  1988. Rural  change  and  the  rural  economic  policy agenda for the 1980s. In Rural economic development in the 1980s , ed. D. L. Brown, 1-28. U.S. Department of Agriculture, ERS-69. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
- Butler, M. A., and Calvin Beale. 1994. Rural-urban continuum codes for metro and nonmetro counties, 1993. Staff Report no. 9425. Washington, DC: Agriculture and Rural Economy Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- Cook, Patricia. 1994. The revised ERS county typology: An overview. Research Report no. 89. Washington, DC:  Agriculture  and  Rural  Economy  Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- Cromartie, John B., and M. Nord. 1997. Migration contributes to nonmetro per capita income growth. Rural Conditions and Trends 8:40-45.
- Diringer, E. 1994. Remaking the West: The Cody saga. The  San  Francisco  Chronicle December  15: A1-3.

Fuguitt, Glen V., and Calvin L. Beale. 1996. Recent trends  in  nonmetropolitan  migration:  T oward  a new turnaround? Growth and Change 27:156-74.

Galston, W. A., and K. J. Baehler. 1995. Rural development in the United States: Connecting theory, prac- tice, and possibilities. Washington, DC: Island Press.

- Long, Larry, and A. Nucci. 1997a. The Hoover index of population concentration: A correction and an update. The Professional Geographer 49:431-40.
- ---. 1997b.  The  clean  break  revisited:  Is  U.S. population  again  deconcentrating? Environment and Planning A 29:1355-66.
- Lorah, Paul. 2000. Population growth, economic security, and cultural change. In Wilderness science in a  time  of  change  conference ,  volume  2: Wilderness within the context of larger systems ,  ed.  Stephen F. McCool, David N. Cole, William T. Borrie, and Jennifer O'Loughlin, 230-37. Proceedings RMRSP-15-VOL-2.  Ogden,  UT:  U.S.  Department  of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station.
- McGranahan, David A. 1999. Natural amenities drive rural population change. Agricultural Economic Report no. 781. Washington, DC: Food and Rural

Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.

- McGranahan, David A., J. C. Hession, F. K. Hines, and M. F. Jordon. 1986. Social and economic characteristics of the population in metro and nonmetro counties, 1970-1980. U.S. Department of Agriculture, ERS-58.  Washington,  DC:  U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- Nelson,  Peter  B.,  and  William  B.  Beyers.  1998. Using  economic  base  models  to  explain  new trends  in  rural  income. Growth  and  Change 29 (3):295-318.
- Plane, David A. 1999. Geographical pattern analysis  of  income  migration  in  the  United  States . International Journal of Population Geography 5:195-212.
- Plane, David A., and Peter A. Rogerson. 1994. The geographical analysis of population. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc.
- Power, Thomas M. 1994. Thinking about naturalresource-dependent  economies:  Moving  beyond the folk economies of the rear-view mirror. In A new  century  for  natural  resource  management ,  ed. Robert  L.  Knight  and  Sarah  F.  Bates,  121-43. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- ---. 1996. Lost landscapes and failed economies: The search for a value of place. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Rasker, Raymond. 1993. Rural development, conservation,  and  public  policy  in  the  Greater  Y ellowstone  ecosystem. Society  and  Natural  Resources 6:109-26.
- ---. 1995. An economic overview of the interior Columbia Basin: Facts, myths, and challenges for ecosystem management. Bozeman, MT: The Wilderness Society.
- Riebsame,  William  E.,  ed.  1997. Atlas  of  the  New West:  Portrait  of  a  changing  region. New  York: W. W. Norton and Company.
- Robbins,  William  G.  1994. Colony  and  empire:  The capitalist transformation of the American West. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
- Rudzitis, Gundars 1989. Migration, places, and nonmetropolitan development. Urban Geography 10:396-411.
- ---. 1991. Migration, sense of place, and nonmetroplitan vitality. Urban Geography 12:80-88.
- ---.  1993.  Migration,  sense  of  place,  and  the American West. Urban Geograhy 14:574-84.
- ---. 1996. Wilderness and the changing American West. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- ---. 1998. Towards a theory of place in the American West. Association of American Geographers 94th annual meeting, 25-29 March, Boston, MA.
- Rudzitis, Gundars, and R. A. Streatfield. 1993. The importance of amenities and attitudes:  A  Washington example. Journal of Environmental Systems 22:269-77.
- Shumway, J. Matthew, and James Davis. 1996. Nonmetropolitan  population  change  in  the  intermountain West. Rural Sociology 61:512-28.
- Snow, Donald. 1997. Introduction. In The next West: Public lands, community, and economy in the American West , ed. J. A. Baden and D. Snow, 1-9. Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Summers, Gene F., F. Horton, and C. Gringeri. 1990. Rural labor-market changes in the United States. In Rural restructuring: Global processes and their responses , ed. T. Marsden, P . Lowe, and S. Whatmore, 12964. London: David Fulton Publishers.
- U.S.  Census  Bureau.  1997. Population  estimates  by state and county with components of change. Washington, DC: Population Distribution Branch.
- ---. Census Regions and Divisions of the U.S. http://www.census.gov/geo/www/us\_regdiv.pdf (last accessed 3 July 2001).
- U.S.  Internal  Revenue  Service  (IRS).  Various  dates. IRS  area-to-area  migration  and  county  income  data. Washington, DC: IRS Statistics of Income Division.
- Vias, Alexander C. 1999. Jobs follow people in the rural  Rocky  Mountain  West. Rural  Development Perspectives 14 (2):14-23.
- von  Reichert, Christine,  and  Gundars  Rudzitis. 1992. Multinomial logistic models explaining income changes of migrants to high-amenity counties. Review of Regional Studies 22:25-42.
- ---. 1994. Rent and wage effects  on  choice  of amenity  destinations  of  the  labor  and  nonlabor force. Journal of Regional Science 34:445-55.

J. MATTHEW SHUMWAY is an Associate Professor  in  the  Department  of  Geography  at  Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602. E-mail: jms7@ email.byu.edu. His research interests include migration and rural geography.

SAMUEL OTTERSTROM is an Assistant Professor  in  the  Department  of  Geography  at  Brigham Young University, Provo, UT 84602. E-mail: sam\_ otterstrom@byu.edu.  His  research  interests  are  in historical geography, Central America, and international trade.