<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Political Ecologies of Dynamic Wetlands: Hydrosocial Waterscapes in the Okavango Delta

Brian King, Jamie E. Shinn, Kayla Yurco, Kenneth R. Young &amp; Kelley A. Crews

To cite this article: Brian King, Jamie E. Shinn, Kayla Yurco, Kenneth R. Young &amp; Kelley A. Crews (2018): Political Ecologies of Dynamic Wetlands: Hydrosocial Waterscapes in the Okavango Delta, The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2018.1455524

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2018.1455524

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 17 May 2018.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 15

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Political Ecologies of Dynamic Wetlands: Hydrosocial Waterscapes in the Okavango Delta

## Brian King

The Pennsylvania State University

Jamie E. Shinn

West Virginia University

## Kayla Yurco

James Madison University

## Kenneth R. Young, and Kelley A. Crews

University of Texas at Austin

Research within geography and related disciplines has directed much attention to the coupled interactions between social and ecological systems. These studies have usefully analyzed the multifaceted, temporal, and scalar dimensions of human -environment interactions and how future environmental change will continue to challenge human resource needs. Political ecology research has also made contributions in this regard, particularly by emphasizing livelihood systems, impacts of conservation and development, agricultural production, and environmental governance. Yet although political ecology research has contributed to socioecological systems scholarship, much of this work has been situated within dryland environments or marine ecosystems that have particular biophysical features. Comparatively, wetland environments that experience dynamic fl ooding regimes warrant further attention from political ecology. This article engages with the fi ndings from an ongoing research project that is evaluating the impacts of fl ooding variability for rural livelihoods in the Okavango Delta of Botswana. We outline some of the main fi ndings from this work by concentrating on two themes central to political ecology: access and governance. We conclude by arguing that the Okavango Delta should be understood as a hydrosocial waterscape that encompasses a variety of socioecological relationships within the region, as well as the power relations operating at a variety of scales that both produce and govern them. Key Words: Botswana, hydrosocial waterscape, Okavango Delta, political ecology, wetland.

地 理 学 与 相 关 领 域 研 究 , 已 对 社 会 与 生 态 系 统 间 的 对 偶 互 动 投 以 诸 多 关 注 。 这 些 研 究 经 常 分 析 人 类 -环 境 互 动 的 多 方 、 暂 时 且 尺 度 之 面 向 , 以 及 未来 的 环 境 变 迁 如 何 持 续 挑 战 人 类 资 源 需 求 。 政 治 生 态 学 研 究 亦 对 此 作 出 贡 献 , 特 别 通 过 强 调 生 计 系 统 、 保 育 与 发 展 的 冲击 、 农 业 生 产 , 以 及 环 境 治 理 。 仅 管 政 治 生 态 研 究 已 对 社 会 生 态 系 统 文 献 做 出 贡 献 , 这 些 研 究 多 半 置 于 具 有 特 定 生 态 物 理 特 徵 的 乾 燥 地 环 境 或 海洋 生 态 系 统 。 相 较 之下 , 经 历 洪 泛 动 态 的 湿 地 环 境 则 需 政 治 生 态 学 的 进 一 步 关 注 。 本 文 涉 入 一个 评 估 洪 泛 变 异 对 于 博 茨 瓦 纳 奥 卡 万 戈 三 角 洲 的 农 村 生 计 影 响 之 持 续 进 行 的 研 究 计 画 之 发 现 。 我 们 通 过 聚 焦 政 治 生 态 学 的 两 大 核 心 主 题 --获 取 管 道 与 治 理 --概 述 该 研 究 的 若 干 主 要 发 现 。 我 们于 结 论 中主 张 , 奥 卡 万 戈 三 角 洲 应 被 理 解 为 包 含 区 域 中 多 样 的 社 会 生 态 关 系 、 以 及 在 生 产与 治 理 这 些 关 系 的 多 重 尺 度 上 运 作 的 权 力 关 系 之 水 文 社 会 水 景 。

键

关

词

:

博

茨

瓦

纳

,

水

文

社

会

水

景

,

奥

卡

万

戈

三

角

洲

,

政

治

生

态

学

,

湿

地

。

La investigaci  on en geografía y disciplinas a fi nes ha puesto mucha atenci  on a las interacciones pareadas entre los sistemas sociales y ecol  ogicos. Estos estudios han analizado provechosamente las dimensiones multifac  eticas, temporales y escalares de las interacciones humano -ambientales, y c  omo el futuro cambio ambiental continuar  a desa fi ando las necesidades humanas de recursos. La investigaci  on de ecología política tambi  en ha hecho contribuciones al respecto, en particular enfatizando los sistemas de supervivencia, los impactos de conservaci  on y desarrollo, la producci  on agrícola y la gobernanza ambiental. Con todo, aunque la investigaci  on de ecología política ha contribuido a la erudici  on sobre los sistemas socioecol  ogicos, una gran parte de este trabajo ha esta situado dentro de entornos de tierras secas o en ecosistemas marinos que tienen rasgos biofísicos particulares. Comparativamente, en los entornos de humedales que experimentan regímenes din  amicos de inundaci  on se justi fi ca una atenci  on adicional desde la ecología política. Este artículo se ocupa de los hallazgos de un proyecto de investigaci  on en desarrollo que eval  ua los impactos de la variabilidad de las inundaciones sobre los medios de vida rurales en el Delta del Okavango de Botswana. Resumimos algunos de los principales descubrimientos de este trabajo concentr  andonos en dos temas centrales para la ecología política: acceso y gobernanza. Concluimos sosteniendo que el Delta del Okavango debe entenderse como un paisaje acu  atico hidrosocial que abarca una variedad de relaciones socioecol  ogicas dentro de la regi  on, lo mismo que las relaciones de poder que operan a una variedad de escalas que a la vez las producen y gobiernan. Palabras clave: Botswana, Delta del Okavango, ecología política, humedal, paisaje acu  atico hidrosocial.

R esearch within geography and related disciplines has directed much attention to the coupled interactions between social and ecological systems (Young et al. 2006; Ostrom 2007, 2009; Cote and Nightingale 2012; Moss et al. 2013). These studies have usefully demonstrated the multifaceted, temporal, and scalar dimensions of human -environment interactions that affect human resource needs and livelihood systems in signi fi cant ways. Political ecology research has also made noteworthy contributions on these topics, especially with regard to livelihood systems, impacts of conservation and development, agricultural production, and environmental governance (Zimmerer and Bassett 2003; Peet and Watts 2004; Perreault, Bridge, and McCarthy 2015). Since its emergence in the U.S. academy in the 1970s, political ecology has remained a robust and diverse fi eld of study. Central to political ecology has been attention to how local management practices are characterized as the primary causes of environmental degradation, when they in fact represent rational decision making within interlinked political economies. Political ecology research has analyzed a range of topics, including resource access regimes (Ribot and Peluso 2003), environmental governance (Agrawal 2005; J. McCarthy 2005; Bridge and Perreault 2009), impacts of conservation and development (Schroeder 1999; Neumann 2001), and gendered dynamics (Rocheleau, Thomas-Slayter, and Wangari 1996; Sundberg 2011; Elmhirst 2015).

Robbins (2012) argued that political ecology is a narrative that is framed around fi ve dominant theses. First, political ecology has challenged assumptions surrounding degradation and marginalization, in which local resource decision making could be classifi ed as unsustainable, thus necessitating the enclosure of common property or modernist development planning. Second, political ecology has exposed the ways in which protected areas and other types of biodiversity conservation can exclude local actors from participating or bene fi ting from them. Third, political ecology research has helped show how con fl icts over the environment are tied to a myriad of social and structural dynamics, including gendered, racial, and class-based struggles. Fourth, political ecology has asserted that environmental policy and rule making create environmental subjects and, fi nally, there has been a focus on the interactions between human and nonhuman nature. More recently, Perreault, Bridge, and McCarthy (2015) asserted that political ecology is best understood not by a research topic or scalar or sociospatial focus but rather as a ' set of commitments that are held in common ' (7). These include a theoretical commitment to critical social theory and a postpositivist understanding of nature, in addition to ' indepth, direct observation involving qualitative research of some sort, often in combination with quantitative methods and/or document analysis ' (Perreault, Bridge, and McCarthy 2015, 7).

Although political ecology has been accused of being so broad that it threatens to pull apart, there has been an emphasis on land-based ecosystems rather than on oceans or other types of waterscapes. This is partly a product of the fi eld ' s origins, with groundbreaking work in the 1980s being conducted on famines in West Africa (Watts 1983), agrarian -pastoralist con fl icts (Bassett 1988), soil erosion (Blaikie 1985; Blaikie and Brook fi eld 1987), tropical deforestation (Hecht 1985), and conservation con fl icts in East Africa (Neumann 2001). Comparatively, aquatic environments warrant further attention from political ecology. We contend that this is particularly urgent for wetlands and other inland water systems that experience fl ooding regimes that are spatially and temporally dynamic in terms of the timing, location, extent, and duration of these events. These systems can present uncertainty for residents while generating distinct challenges to livelihoods and governance systems. Additionally, these socioecological systems are subject to increasing external pressures from global climate change (cf. Vogt et al. 2016) that have implications for future resource needs and access patterns.

This article engages with fi ndings from an ongoing research project that is evaluating the impacts of variability in fl ooding for rural livelihoods and environmental perceptions in the Okavango Delta of Botswana. The next section of the article provides a review of political ecology work that has concentrated on water-based systems. We then provide an overview of the case study and methodology before presenting some of the main fi ndings from this work by concentrating on two themes central to political ecology: access and governance. The article concludes by outlining new insights for political ecology that engage with emerging research examining the human -water nexus as a hydrosocial arrangement that involves a mix of socioecological dynamics.

## Political Ecologies of Water: Dynamic Wetlands and Change

The research that informs this article is based in the Okavango Delta of northern Botswana, which is a region that experiences dynamic variations in fl ooding patterns (Gumbricht, McCarthy, and Merry 2001; Ellery et al. 2003; Heinl et al. 2006). Flooding regimes within the Okavango Delta result in part from waters originating in the Angolan highlands that create a spatial disconnect between cause and effect (T. S. McCarthy et al. 2000; Murray-Hudson, Wolski, and Ringrose 2006). Local populations are affected by seasonal fl oods that directly disrupt homesteads and livelihoods (Shinn et al. 2014; King et al. 2016; Shinn 2016) but also more broadly in terms of resource extraction patterns that shift in response to changes in the availability and accessibility of resources due to dynamic fl ood patterns. The complex hydrosocial fl ooding regime in the Okavango Delta, therefore, raises pressing questions related to resource access and environmental governance, including consideration of

how socioecological relationships with water vary, even within the extent of a single river basin.

Bakker and Morinville (2013) de fi ned water governance as ' the range of political, organizational and administrative processes through which community interests are articulated, their input is incorporated, decisions are made and implemented and decision-makers are held accountable in the development and management of water resources and delivery of water services ' (1). Although useful, this de fi nition leaves important aspects of water governance unaddressed. Water governance processes are widely understood to expand beyond formal government structures to incorporate nongovernmental actors, including local populations, which can leave the concepts of community and scale unde fi ned (Linton 2012). This is important for a number of reasons, including that communities themselves are not homogenous in their experiences with and access to water even at the local scale, in addition to having differential experiences with fl ooding events. As a result, researchers have questioned the appropriate scale for considering water governance (Harris 2009; Molle 2009; Norman and Bakker 2009; Budds and Hinojosa-Valencia 2012), with some studies arguing for a rescaling of governance to the local level (Linton 2012). Political ecology research has productively engaged with the concept of environmental governance, with governance being de fi ned as ' the fundamental question of how organisation, decisions, order and rule are achieved in heterogeneous and highly differentiated societies. At its core, governance addresses the problem of economic and political co-ordination in social life ' (Bridge and Perreault 2009, 476). Research on socioecological systems and political ecology have, albeit with differences, concentrated on the individuals, organizations, rules, customs, and practices that result in collective decision making (Folke et al. 2005; Lemos and Agrawal 2006; Ostrom 2015).

Work from political ecologies of water contributes more critical understandings of water governance (Bakker 2003; Budds 2009; Loftus 2009; Linton 2010, 2012; Budds and Hinojosa-Valencia 2012). This body of literature recognizes that fl ows of water and the social processes that govern them are not separate entities but rather comprise ' hydrosocial ' arrangements. Bakker (2003) explained the difference between ' H2O ' as a biophysical entity and ' water ' as part of landscapes created by uneven processes of development and capitalism. Bakker (2003) suggested that because its circulation is dependent on both the hydrological cycle and the social institutions that mediate it, water is ' physically produced, but also socially enacted ' (49). Linton and Budds (2014) likewise described the ' socio-natural process by which water and society make and remake each other over space and time ' (170). Similarly, Swyngedouw (2009) urged continued thought on how the hydrosocial is governed because power relations are often refracted through hydrosocial con fi gurations. Relatedly, work on waterscapes provides a useful framework for understanding how hydrosocial relationships are socially and ecologically produced, occur over multiple spatial and temporal scales, and are produced and reproduced by power relations (Budds and Hinojosa-Valencia 2012).

There have been foundational studies leveraging political ecology to examine marine ecosystems (Mansfi eld 2004; St. Martin 2005, 2006). One of the areas of emphasis of these studies has been fi shing practices within offshore marine environments, usefully focusing on the social dimensions of management and resource access (Campbell 2007). Additionally, Levine (2007) outlined the challenges to marine protected management in Zanzibar, highlighting how these arrangements are necessarily multiscalar given shifts in conservation toward neoliberal practices. Although not drawing explicitly from political ecology, other studies productively consider access and governance regimes within hydrosocial arrangements. Sithirith (2014) examined how the governance system of the Tonle Sap Lake in Cambodia resulted in a patron -client dynamic that increased resource exploitation by local residents. In a related vein, Gillespie (2017) effectively showed how environmental governance is made complex through different regulatory regimes that are intended to generate formal practices for management. Finally, Boelens et al. (2016) emphasized the concept of hydrosocial territories, which they asserted are ' socially, naturally and politically constituted spaces that are (re)created through the interactions amongst human practices, water fl ows, hydraulic technologies, biophysical elements, socio-economic structures and cultural-political institutions ' (1).

These studies demonstrate the need for continued research leveraging political ecology to inland wetland environments in which biophysical processes are a driver to coupled socioecological systems. Building on previous research, we assert that understanding the Okavango Delta, and similar wetland environments elsewhere, as a hydrosocial waterscape encompasses the variety of socioecological relationships that occur within the region, in addition to the power relations operating at a variety of scales, from local to international, that both produce and govern them. As the next section explains, the Okavango Delta is a dynamic system characterized by longer term variability, such that the region can experience high and differential variability in proximity to, amount of, and timing of the arrival of fl oodwaters into the system. The consequence is that the social patterns associated with the fl ooding regime can be tightly calibrated in their responses, depending on both proximity and predictability. Additionally, this setting requires attending to biophysical processes as an active force shaping those hydrosocial relationships. As such, it is anticipated that an analysis informed by political ecology will identify some unique characteristics associated with this type of socioecological system.

Figure 1 Map of study region.

<!-- image -->

## Case Study and Methodology

The Okavango Delta (see Figure 1) is an inland alluvial fan that extends from the panhandle to the distal portions to the south. The delta is composed of a range of ecosystems and hosts a variety of land cover types, from open water to papyrus swamps and reed beds, surrounded by areas of grasslands that might fl ood, and woodlands (Mendelsohn et al. 2010). These characteristics produce diverse habitats and resources for human and nonhuman uses, also contributing to a complex and shifting socioecological system shaped by variability in annual fl ooding (J. M. McCarthy et al. 2003). The fl ooding regime is generated by local precipitation and upstream precipitation stemming from the Angolan highlands, of which the two systems vary over time and are believed to respond to shifts in the Southern Atlantic Oscillation (Heinl et al. 2006). Water levels in the fan vary considerably seasonally and spatially each year, covering anywhere from 8,000 to 12,000 km 2 (Heinl et al. 2006). The fl oods typically arrive into the distal reaches of the delta four months after the peak of the local dry season and following the local rainy season (Gumbricht, McCarthy, and Merry 2001).

The Okavango Delta is additionally characterized not only by strong seasonal cycles but also by longer term (interannual and quasi-decadal) variability, such that the region can experience high and differential variability in proximity to, amount of, and timing of the arrival of the water (Ellery et al. 2003). This means that although fl ooding into the Okavango Delta occurs annually, the timing, extent, duration, and location of the waters can vary signi fi cantly. The location of fl oodwaters can be altered by human settlement within the secondary fl oodplain, as well as by wildlife such as the hippopotamus that has been observed to produce incised channels through their movements that act as nodes for swamp expansion (McCarthy, Ellery, and Bloem 1998). Across the study region, there is a diversity of ethnic groups, which include the long-term resident Bayei and BaSarwa, with more recent immigrants including Hambukushu, Herero, and many Tswana-descended tribes. Recent census estimates indicate that 175,631 people live in the entire North-West district, which encompasses the entire delta and other areas of northwestern Botswana (Botswana Central Statistics Of fi ce 2011).

This article reports on the fi ndings from an ongoing research project that is integrating qualitative and quantitative methods, speci fi cally semistructured interviewing, remote sensing analysis, vegetation transects, and livelihood mapping. Household semistructured interviews were conducted from 2010 to 2016 in the villages of Seronga, Mababe, and Etsha 1, Etsha 6, and Etsha 13.

A total of 131 qualitative interviews were conducted with households selected using a spatially strati fi ed random sampling procedure. This was determined to be necessary given the role of spatial location in determining whether a household directly experienced variability in fl ooding over a series of years. The three Etsha villages run north to south along the western edge of the Okavango Delta and were chosen to provide a social transect to help examine microvariations in fl ooding extent and social perceptions of environmental change. There were eighteen interviews in Etsha 1, thirty-seven in Etsha 6, twenty-six in Etsha 13, thirty in Seronga, and twenty in Mababe, with these numbers re fl ecting differences in the population size of each of the villages. The ATLAS.ti software package was used to code and categorize data for relevant themes to

generate analytical narratives concentrating on environmental dynamics and dominant livelihood systems.

We hypothesized that the degree of variability in the fl ooding regime would be an important feature of livelihoods, resource access, and governance systems in the Okavango Delta. By sheer coincidence, fi eldwork occurred during a period of increased annual fl ooding from 2009 to 2011 that resulted in intraregional and intravillage impacts, including the permanent displacement of residents in one of the study areas (Shinn et al. 2014; King et al. 2016) and reworking of human -wildlife interactions in another (Yurco et al. 2017). Given that, we gathered data on local people ' s perceptions and actions in three sites on the delta that have very different fl ooding regimes, from regular seasonal fl uctuations in Seronga, to subdecadal changes in the Etsha villages and decadal change in Mababe. The temporal frequencies that residents must cope with across the three regions range from effects of typical seasonality in a low-latitude site, to changes caused by the El Ni ~ no Southern Oscillation or other such subdecadal fl uctuations, to changes where residents must outmigrate, retain knowledge, or relearn past coping strategies over several decades. As the next section details, this results in distinct resource access regimes across the study region that are challenged to respond to environmental fl uctuations.

## Resource Access

Variability in fl ooding dynamics has broad implications for human populations whose livelihoods are dependent on a range of natural resources associated with the fl oodwaters and in some areas where residents have constructed homes in the secondary fl oodplain during years with lower fl ood levels. Livelihood dynamics within the region include traditional practices of subsistence agriculture and livestock management, in addition to the collection and use of a number of natural resources such as reeds for construction and aquatic vegetation for consumption, construction, and basket making for sales. Two types of agricultural production dominate the region: dryland farming that is reliant on precipitation for irrigation and molapo ( fl oodplain) farming.

In the village of Etsha 1, there is clear evidence of the relationships between fl ooding patterns and livelihoods. During interviews in 2011, most residents of the village noted that they were planning on collecting reeds or grasses later than in the past because the water level was too high to collect at the time when the plants were ' ready ' to be harvested. Some questioned whether they would be able to collect these resources at all, and many reported not having collected reeds and grasses for this reason at all for many years, which caused signi fi cant challenges. Still, residents also discussed advantages and disadvantages of high water for reed and grass collection because even as the water inhibits access, it also reportedly makes the plants stronger. Some residents also noted that resource access overall is more dif fi cult because of competition among people or because of water levels inhibiting access. Figure 2 is a representative household located along the Okavango River in Seronga.

Figure 2 Household in Seronga. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

During interviews conducted in 2011, residents of Etsha 6 expressed clear negative impacts of fl ooding changes, with dif fi culty in accessing food due to variable harvests and dif fi culty collecting resources due to fl ooding (although several residents, particularly those who were elderly, remarked on the advantages of having water nearer to the village). One resident noted how increased fl ooding since 2009 has affected varied livelihood practices, explaining that if they wait for the water to go down before they collect reeds, for example, it can already be time to plow. At that time, because agriculture is a necessity, they will forgo reed collection. There is generally decreased collection of natural resources like reeds and grasses or plants for food due to fl ooding. By comparison, interviews with Mababe residents in 2012 indicated that for them, higher water levels mean easier access to resources like water lilies, fi sh, and reeds and grasses, although some argued that reeds and grasses are not ever available in Mababe. Many noted that it is generally too dangerous to collect these materials because of animals like crocodiles and hippos, however.

Interviews in Seronga in 2012 revealed different socioecological relationships with fl ooding than in the other study sites. This is primarily due to Seronga ' s geographic location along the channel of the Okavango River. We observed fl ooding variability to be less extreme in this location; however, even though the water never recedes far, variability was noticeable. This was evidenced by a football fi eld underwater in

2012, which shows this variability over time and space. Many residents of Seronga noted that the water level was lower than that in the previous year because they experienced less rain in 2012, which could indicate greater in fl uence of local precipitation on fl ooding dynamics than in the other study sites. Figure 3 is from a mokoro trip outside Seronga, which helps show the waterscape that residents must navigate to collect natural resources.

In Seronga, people noted both increasing and decreasing fl ooding levels over time. As one respondent noted of general variability, ' There is more water and sometimes there is less. ' Another woman indicated:

I think the water will keep on decreasing and also when it decreases it brings crocodiles that eat the cattle. Changes in the river are bad for us because the family lives mostly on things living in the river like fruits and grass. When the levels are that high we cannot cross. In the past, we would cross with water at our ankles.

This was echoed by another female respondent in Seronga who explained:

It is dif fi cult because in the past the way we collected it was dry. We could walk and now we have to take a boat.

Residents believed that the water levels would continue to be variable in the future, increasing and decreasing in turn.

Figure 3 Mokoro outside Seronga. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Political ecology has provided valuable examinations of how resource access regimes are embedded within political and economic systems. One advantage of our study is that it offers two particular fi ndings that emerge from locating the research within a dynamic wetland system. First, interviews with residents during the period of expanding fl ooding demonstrate the importance of fl uvial geomorphic position and economic capital in managing shifts in resource access opportunities. Residents in closer proximity to the most volatile fl oodplain dynamics are more vulnerable to change, and those who have resources such as boats are better able to access resources. Second, our research shows that the variability in the fl ooding regime is an active agent in confronting existing access patterns, in terms of either the spatial location and extent of natural resources or their availability at particular temporal moments. At periods of low water, residents can walk through the secondary fl oodplain to access reeds and grasses, whereas in periods of high water, boats are an option to those who can afford them. During interim periods where water is present but not overly deep, however, members of our research team observed that residents in the Etsha villages face even more constrained access because there is too much water to walk through, yet not enough to allow boats to navigate. As a result, examining resource access within the Okavango Delta as a hydrosocial waterscape assists in understanding how access regimes are not solely mediated by political, economic, and cultural systems but are also produced through the interface with a dynamic biophysical system that varies over time and space.

## Governance

A range of social actors operating at a variety of institutional levels collude and con fl ict in producing the rules shaping access to farming territory and other natural resource patterns. This necessitates detailed attention to these mechanisms to understand the ways in which they enable and constrain decision making, particularly within areas experiencing dynamic environmental change. Nationally, the Department of Wildlife and National Parks in the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife and Tourism sets rules for hunting of wildlife in the delta and provides permits for fi shing that specify seasons and the size and type of the nets that can be used. The Tawana Land Board is responsible for allocating plots of land for settlement. The Department of Forestry, which is located under the Ministry of Environment and Tourism, sets permits for collection and is guided by three government acts designed to prevent, control, and manage natural resources in the Okavango Delta: the Forestry Act, the Agricultural Resources Conservation Act, and the Herbage Preservation Act. Regionally, there are government of fi cials working from the town of Maun or Gumare, and within the villages there are traditional authorities such as local chiefs and headmen who have in fl uence over local issues. Based on our interviews, we found that these individuals provide guidance on the location and timing of resource collection and molapo farming. The tribal authority of fi ce is based in Etsha 6, with the other villages having their own headmen who work under the supervision of the chief.

One important form of environmental governance is the formal rules established by local authorities, regional of fi ces, and the national government in determining who has access to natural resources and under what conditions. For example, in the case of reed collection, there are rules determining the season of collection, to ensure that reeds are given time to reproduce before harvest. Several residents explained that although it is understood when the permitted season for collection occurs, there are times when the materials are collected out of season. There was also not clarity among all residents on when the collection season was; some residents explained that the government emphasizes that collection begins in June and concludes in July, whereas others emphasized that October and November are when collection is allowed.

Residents expressed concern that natural resource rules made livelihood systems more dif fi cult. For example, one Etsha 6 resident indicated that the imposition of the rules, particularly in terms of fi shing, increased the dif fi culty for households that are dependent on these resources. As one female resident of Seronga explained, ' We were so surprised [by the rules]. We are not sure how we will live. ' There was also a clear perception among many informants that the rules governing access to natural resources would get more restrictive over time, including increasing the enforcement of an existing requirement for residents to get permits for reed collection. Some of this stems from the belief that the national government wants people to stop farming in the secondary fl oodplain, a dynamic discussed further later.

One of the ways in which residents navigate the rules for reed collection is by breaking them, because as one person explained, the rules are not ' tight. ' A local community leader explained that although people are supposed to get permits to collect reeds, very few people do because the process through which permits for commercial reed collection are managed is not viable. She explained that residents are supposed to pay 2 pula (less than US$1) to cut reeds, but it is necessary to go to Shakawe, which is about 100 km away, to pay the fee. She questioned why anyone would pay 22 pula (approximately US$2) for a bus ride to Shakawe to pay a 2 pula fee to cut reeds, indicating that if they would just put an of fi ce in Etsha 6, then people would actually do it and would not get in trouble for failing to pay the fee. She complained that people who are educated in Gaborone, the capital of Botswana, decide what uneducated people in places like Etsha 6 can do, noting that at conservation conferences in the capital city of Gaborone, they talk about these important issues but they do not actually know

anything about the livelihoods of the people they are discussing.

One of the more pronounced governance negotiations has involved molapo farming, which takes place within the secondary fl oodplain to take advantage of the available water. Molapo soils are preferred by some residents to those in the dryland further away from the fl oodplain because the fi elds are seen as more fertile and less reliant on variable precipitation patterns. In both types of fi elds, maize, a staple grain in the region, is grown, along with beans, melons, squash, and sorghum. There is uncertainty associated with molapo farming due to crop loss resulting from variability in fl ooding dynamics, along with insecure land tenure and crop damage from livestock and wild animals. This has intensi fi ed in recent years as the Botswanan government has reduced support for molapo farming, leaving some residents with the impression that this practice is no longer allowed. As one Seronga resident noted, people used to farm molapo more than ten years ago but the government took the land back and does not allow this type of farming. She explained that it is now ' grazing land for hippos. '

An informal governance response to fl ooding variability is to seek to control those events; for example, with dams or levees. In fact, we have documented some control efforts in the Etsha villages where local groups self-organized to build low check dams with sand- fi lled sacks to limit fl ooding of their homes, which was a strategy deemed illegal by the national government, as the delta is classi fi ed as ' navigable waters ' that should not be interrupted in their fl ow (King et al. 2016). In Mababe, residents enacted another type of response to fl ooding, by instituting a complete change in livelihood strategies due to burgeoning wildlife populations due to increased fl oodwaters. The water fi rst brought buffalo, hippos, and elephants, which were followed closely by predators such as hyenas, crocodiles, and lions. As a result of the increased presence of dangerous wildlife, residents of Mababe reported giving up on crops, livestock husbandry, and even having household pets (Yurco et al. 2017).

These dynamics underscore the bene fi ts of leveraging political ecology for examining dynamic wetland environments. A crucial dimension of livelihood adaptability is the possibility of substitution, in these cases, sources of incomes or of needed products that were provided by the government, by outside remittances, or by seasonal labor. Yet fl exibility in livelihood systems confronts governance regimes that might constrain the development of adaptive responses. Political ecology research in dynamic wetland environments must consider the types of governance systems in place and whether they require modi fi cation to respond successfully to continued dynamism and future environmental change, along with the capacity of local people to plan for alternative activities.

## Conclusions

The dynamism of the Okavango Delta is driven by an interplay of variations in the external drivers with the interactions of the social and ecological subsystems. In the case of a fl ooding regime, the external drivers include climate and hydrological processes that affect the duration and extent of fl ooding, the interlude between fl ooding events, and the ecological consequences that occur. Our focus here has been to question whether this presents unique political ecologies that have distinct impacts for resource access patterns and governance regimes compared to landbased or marine environments. Floods do more than destroy infrastructure and inconvenience people; they also bring water and sediments into a fl oodplain, potentially serving as a crucial resource in a seasonally dry climate and renewing soil fertility through fl ood deposits.

We have previously documented that the fl oodplain areas of the Etsha villages are considered to be desirable for agriculture (Shinn et al. 2014; King et al. 2016), and the increased wildlife populations in the fl oodplain around Mababe were valuable for nature-based tourism (Yurco et al. 2017). The fi ndings presented here also reveal how the Okavango Delta is a hydrosocial waterscape with biophysical processes that drive socioenvironmental change and human modi fi cation and adjustment. The advantages and disadvantages of fl ooding can not only be addressed with responses of individual households but could be dealt with through the formation of institutions including the national government and regional Land Boards and the interactions of the communities with the different wildlife or conservation authorities who regulate or respond to con fl icts.

The socioecological systems represented by livelihoods and natural resource patterns in the Okavango Delta vary as a function of the spatial consequences of frequency changes in the fl ooding regime. As time between maximum fl oods increases, there is less chance that individuals will have coped successfully with a previous fl ood. As such, the ability to pass on information to newer generations becomes a crucial dimension of adaptive capacity. In fact, livelihoods before and after the fl oods in Mababe were shown by our data to be completely different, with local people switching from an agrarian lifestyle to almost complete dependence on wildlife-based tourism, accompanied by governmental interventions and subsidies. In contrast, the dryland versus fl oodplain agriculture implemented by the Etsha farmers is knowledge useful every year somewhere in the fl oodplain and was particularly important for 2012, the year with the most fl ooding in several decades.

The tight coupling of the fl ooding regime with livelihood practices offers useful contributions to political ecology research. With some critiques of political ecology questioning the degree to which biophysical processes are truly integrated into their analyses (cf. Walker 2005; Turner 2016), the Okavango Delta necessitates addressing social and ecological processes and their interactions. In this case, leveraging political ecology assists in

analyzing local patterns that result in differential expression of fl ooding dynamics and their effects. The result is that a political ecology analysis of a hydrosocial waterscape helps reveal coupled socioecological dynamics and their differential expression over time and space. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

We are grateful to Fuata John, Japhet John, and Kentse Madise for their excellent work as research assistants. Allison White and Evan Grif fi n also assisted in conducting the interviews in the Etsha region in 2011. Our thanks to Brittany Waltemate for creating Figure 1 and to the editor and reviewer for their useful feedback on earlier versions of the article.

## Funding

This research was supported by the United States National Science Foundation (BCS/GSS-0964596) and BCS/GSS Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Supplement Award.

## Literature Cited

- Agrawal, A. 2005. Environmentality: Technologies of government and the making of subjects . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Bakker, K. 2003. An uncooperative commodity: Privatizing water in England and Wales . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Bakker, K., and C. Morinville. 2013. The governance dimensions of water security: A review. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 371 (2002):1 -18.
- Bassett, T. J. 1988. The political ecology of peasant-herder con fl icts in the northern Ivory Coast. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 78 (3):453 -72.
- Blaikie, P. 1985. The political economy of soil erosion in developing countries . New York: Longman.
- Blaikie, P., and H. Brook fi eld, eds. 1987. Land degradation and society . London: Methuen.
- Boelens, R., J. Hoogesteger, E. Swyngedouw, J. Vos, and P. Wester. 2016. Hydrosocial territories: A political ecology perspective. Water International 41 (1):1 -14.
- Botswana Central Statistics Of fi ce. 2011. Botswana population and housing census . Gabarone, Botswana: Central Statistics Of fi ce.
- Bridge, G., and T. Perreault. 2009. Environmental governance. In A companion to environmental geography , ed. N. Castree, D. Demeritt, D. Liverman, and B. Rhoads, 475 -97. Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Budds, J. 2009. Contested H2O: Science, policy and politics in water resources management in Chile. Geoforum 40 (3):418 -30.
- Budds, J., and L. Hinojosa-Valencia. 2012. Restructuring and rescaling water governance in mining contexts: The coproduction of waterscapes in Peru. Water Alternatives 5 (1):119 -37.
- Campbell, L. M. 2007. Local conservation practice and global discourse: A political ecology of sea turtle conservation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 97 (2):313 -34.
- Cote, M., and A. J. Nightingale. 2012. Resilience thinking meets social theory: Situating social change in socioecological systems (SES) research. Progress in Human Geography 36 (4):475 -89.
- Ellery, W. N., A. C. Dahlberg, R. Strydom, M. J. Neal, and J. Jackson. 2003. Diversion of water fl ow from a fl oodplain wetland stream: An analysis of geomorphological setting and hydrological and ecological consequences. Journal of Environmental Management 68 (1):51 -71.
- Elmhirst, R. 2015. Feminist political ecology. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 519 -30. London and New York: Routledge.
- Folke, C., T. Hahn, P. Olsson, and J. Norberg. 2005. Adaptive governance of social-ecological systems. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 30:441 -73.
- Gillespie, J. 2017. Wetland conservation and legal layering: managing Cambodia ' s great lake. The Geographical Journal 184 (1):31 -40.
- Gumbricht, T., T. S. McCarthy, and C. L. Merry. 2001. The topography of the Okavango Delta, Botswana, and its tectonic and sedimentological implications. South African Journal of Geology 104 (3):243 -64.
- Harris, L. 2009. Gender and emergent water governance: Comparative overview of neoliberalized natures and gender dimensions of privatization, devolution and marketization. Gender, Place and Culture 16 (4):387 -408.
- Hecht, S. 1985. Environment, development, and politics: Capital accumulation and the livestock sector in Eastern Amazonia. World Development 13 (6):663 -84.
- Heinl, M., A. Neuenschwander, J. Sliva, and C. Vanderpost. 2006. Interactions between fi re and fl ooding in a southern African fl oodplain system (Okavango Delta, Botswana). Landscape Ecology 21 (5):699 -709.
- King, B., J. E. Shinn, K. R. Young, and K. A. Crews. 2016. Fluid rivers and rigid livelihoods in the Okavango Delta of Botswana. Land 5 (2):16.
- Lemos, M. C., and A. Agrawal. 2006. Environmental governance. Annual Review of Environment and Resources 31 (1):297 -325.
- Levine, A. 2007. Staying a fl oat: State agencies, local communities, and international involvement in marine protected area management in Zanzibar, Tanzania. Conservation and Society 5 (4):562 -87.
- Linton, J. 2010. What is water? The history of a modern abstraction . Vancouver, BC, Canada: University of British Columbia Press.
- ---. 2012. The human right to water: Water, rights, humans, and the relation of things. In The right to water: Politics, governance and social struggles , ed. F. Sultana and A. Loftus, 45 -60. London and New York: Routledge.
- Linton, J., and J. Budds. 2014. The hydrosocial cycle: De fi ning and mobilizing a relational-dialectical approach to water. Geoforum 57:170 -80.
- Loftus, A. 2009. Rethinking political ecologies of water. Third World Quarterly 30 (5):953 -68.
- Mans fi eld, B. 2004. Rules of privatization: Contradictions in neoliberal regulation of North Paci fi c fi sheries. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (3):565 -84.
- ---. 2006. The impact of ' community ' on fi sheries management in the US Northeast. Geoforum 37 (2):169 -84. doi:10.1016/j.geoforum.2005.05.004.
- McCarthy, J. 2005. Scale, sovereignty, and strategy in environmental governance. Antipode 37 (4):731 -53.
- McCarthy, J. M., T. Gumbricht, T. McCarthy, P. Frost, K. Wessels, and F. Seidel. 2003. Flooding patterns of the Okavango wetland in Botswana between 1972 and 2000. Ambio: A Journal of the Human Environment 32 (7):453 -57.
- McCarthy, T. S., G. R. J. Cooper, P. D. Tyson, and W. N. Ellery. 2000. Seasonal fl ooding in the Okavango Delta, Botswana -Recent history and future prospects. South African Journal of Science 96:25 -33.

- McCarthy, T. S., W. N. Ellery, and A. Bloem. 1998. Some observations on the geomorphological impact of hippopotamus ( Hippopotamus amphibius L. ) in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. African Journal of Ecology 36 (1):44 -56.
- Mendelsohn, J., C. van der Post, L. Ramberg, M. MurrayHudson, P. Wolski, and K. Mosepele. 2010. Okavango delta: Floods of life . Windhoek, Namibia: Raison.
- Molle, F. 2009. Water, politics and river basin governance: Repoliticizing approaches to river basin management. Water International 34 (1):62 -70.
- Moss, R. H., G. A. Meehl, M. C. Lemos, J. B. Smith, J. R. Arnold, J. C. Arnott, D. Behar, et al. 2013. Hell and high water: Practice-relevant adaptation science. Science 342 (6):696 -98.
- Murray-Hudson, M., P. Wolski, and S. Ringrose. 2006. Scenarios of the impact of local and upstream changes in climate and water use on hydro-ecology in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. Journal of Hydrology 331:73 -84.
- Neumann, R. P. 2001. Imposing wilderness: Struggles over livelihood and nature preservation in Africa . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Norman, E., and K. Bakker. 2009. Transgressing scales: Water governance across the Canada -U.S. borderland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (1):99 -117.
- Ostrom, E. 2007. A diagnostic approach for going beyond panaceas. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (39):15181 -87.
- ---. 2009. A general framework for analyzing sustainability of social-ecological systems. Science 325 (5939):419 -22.
- ---. 2015. Governing the commons . London: Cambridge University Press.
- Peet, R., and M. Watts. eds. 2004. Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements . 2nd ed. London and New York: Routledge.
- Perreault, T., G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy. 2015. Introduction. In The Routledge handbook of political ecology , ed. T. Perreault, G. Bridge, and J. McCarthy, 3 -18. London and New York: Routledge.
- Ribot, J. C., and N. L. Peluso. 2003. A theory of access. Rural Sociology 68 (2):153 -81.
- Robbins, P. 2012. Political ecology: A critical introduction . 2nd ed. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Rocheleau, D., B. Thomas-Slayter, and E. Wangari. eds. 1996. Feminist political ecology: Global issues and local experience . London and New York: Routledge.
- Schroeder, R. A. 1999. Shady practices: Agroforesty and gender politics in the Gambia . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Schroeder, R. A., K. St. Martin, and K. E. Albert. 2006. Political ecology in North America: Discovering the Third World within? Geoforum 37 (2):163 -68.
- Shinn, J. E. 2016. Adaptive environmental governance of changing social-ecological systems: Empirical insights from the Okavango Delta, Botswana. Global Environmental Change 40:50 -59.
- Shinn, J. E., B. King, K. R. Young, and K. A. Crews. 2014. Variable adaptations: Micro-politics of environmental displacement in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. Geoforum 57:21 -29.
- Sithirith, M. 2014. The patron -client system and its effect on resources management in Cambodia: A case in the Tonle Sap Lake. Asian Politics &amp; Policy 6 (4):595 -609.
- Sundberg, J. 2011. Diabolic caminos in the desert and cat fi ghts on the Rio: A posthumanist political ecology of boundary enforcement in the United States -Mexico
- borderlands. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 101 (2):318 -36.
- Swyngedouw, E. 2009. The political economy and political ecology of the hydrosocial cycle. Journal of Contemporary Water Research and Education 142 (1):56 -60.
- St. Martin, K. 2005. Mapping economic diversity in the First World: The case of fi sheries. Environment and Planning A 37 (6): 959 -79.
- Turner, M. D. 2016. Political ecology II: Engagements with ecology. Progress in Human Geography 40 (3):413 -21.
- Vogt, N., M. Pinedo-Vasquez, E. S. Brondízio, F. G. Rabelo, K. Fernandes, O. Almeida, S. Riveiro, P. J. Deadman, and Y. Dou. 2016. Local ecological knowledge and incremental adaptation to changing fl ood patterns in the Amazon delta. Sustainability Science 11 (4):611 -23.
- Walker, P. A. 2005. Political ecology: Where is the ecology? Progress in Human Geography 29 (1):73 -82.
- Watts, M. 1983. Silent violence: Food, famine and peasantry in northern Nigeria . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Young, O. R., F. Berkhout, G. C. Gallopin, M. A. Janssen, E. Ostrom, and S. Van derLeeuw. 2006. The globalization of socio-ecological systems: An agenda for scienti fi c research. Global Environmental Change 16 (3):304 -16.
- Yurco, K., B. King, K. R. Young, and K. A. Crews. 2017. Human -wildlife interactions and environmental dynamics in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. Society &amp; Natural Resources 30 (9):1112 -26.
- Zimmerer, K. S., and T. J. Bassett, eds. 2003. Political ecology: An integrative approach to geography and environmentdevelopment studies . New York: Guilford.

BRIAN KING is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802. E-mail: king@psu.edu. His research interests focus on the impacts of conservation and development in southern Africa, social and environmental justice, and the intersections among livelihoods, health, and environment.

JAMIE E. SHINN is an Assistant Professor of Geography in the Department of Geology &amp; Geography, West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV 26506. E-mail: jamie.shinn@mail.wvu.edu. Her research focuses on topics related to political ecology, environmental governance, and climate change adaptation, with a regional emphasis on southern Africa.

KAYLAYURCOisaVisiting Assistant Professor in the Geographic Science Program in the Department of Integrated Science and Technology at James Madison University, Harrisonburg, VA 22807. E-mail: yurcokm@jmu.edu. Her research centers on the intersection of gender, environment, and development issues in sub-Saharan Africa.

KENNETH R. YOUNG is a Professor in the Department of Geography &amp; the Environment at the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712. E-mail: kryoung@austin.utexas. edu. His research centers on the biogeography and conservation of biological diversity.

KELLEY A. CREWS is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography &amp; the Environment at the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712. E-mail: kelley@utexa.edu. Her research focuses on remote sensing, land change science, and healthy socioecological systems.