## Building  T emporal  T opology in a GIS Database to Study the Land-Use Changes in a Rural-Urban Environment*

## Danielle J. Marceau, Luc Guindon, Mireille Bruel, and Claude Marois

University of Montreal

This article addresses the issue of linking temporal and spatial information into a GIS database structure to investigate the land-use changes in a rural-urban region over a thirty-five-year period. More specifically, it describes the application of a programming package developed to build temporal topology in an historical land-use GIS database to efficiently perform spatiotemporal queries. The program was created within the MapInfo environment using MapBasic language. Different types of information, such as the rate of change, the relationship between the change of land use and zoning regulations, and land-use succession were extracted from the database. A user-friendly interface was also developed to easily address spatiotemporal queries to the database. This approach represents a flexible and performing tool for scientists and planners who need to efficiently capture essential spatiotemporal information required for geographical inquiry and decision-making. Key Words: GIS, land-use changes, rural-urban environment, spatiotemporal queries, temporal topology.

## Context and Objectives

he temporal dimension is essential for understanding and modeling the dynamics of geographic phenomena. Since time can only be perceived through its effects, capturing the temporal dimension requires detection and analysis of the changes that affect entities composing a geographical space. Change detection lies at the heart  of  many  scientific  issues  of  major  economic and social importance, such as the impact of  global  climatic  changes,  deforestation,  land erosion, and urban expansion. In order to ensure proper  monitoring  and  planning,  models  in which space and time are adequately linked need to be developed (Marceau and Dragicevic 1998). When temporal information is combined with spatial  data,  the  nature  and  structure  of  processes can be understood, cause and effect relationships can be revealed, and predictions can be made (Peuquet 1994; Kelmelis 1998). T

Despite its importance in geographical studies, representing  and  managing  time  has  always been a challenge. Geographers commonly use different  types  of  time  (Couclelis  1999),  and cartography has a long history of various ways for mapping time (for a comprehensive review, see Vasiliev 1997). Over the last few decades, scientists have developed an increasing interest in the potential of geographic information systems  (GIS)  for  managing  time  and  modeling spatiotemporal processes. Several models have been proposed to integrate the spatial and temporal information into a unified GIS data structure (Langran 1992; Cheylan and Lardon 1993; Peuquet 1994; Peuquet and Duan 1995; Claramunt  and  Thériault  1996;  Worboys  1998). Considerable efforts have been devoted to defining the basic concepts underlying the representation and modeling of time ( Jensen et al. 1992;  Edwards,  Gagnon,  and  Bédard  1993; Claramunt, Parent, and Thériault 1998; Frank 1998),  and  to  developing  temporal  query  languages (for a comprehensive review, see Zaniolo et al. 1997). Improved visualization techniques have also been proposed to more efficiently represent data changing in time and space (Mioc et al. 1999).

However,  most  of  the  progress  achieved  in spatiotemporal reasoning within a GIS context continues to be largely constrained by the current technology and is not implemented into operational  systems.  Consequently,  scientists  and practitioners who need a GIS are limited by the common  representation  of  space  and  time available  in  the  commercial  systems-that is, the snapshot model. A snapshot can be defined as an instantaneous picture of a geographic area that  provides  information  about  entities  and their attributes at a specific moment in time. A date is associated to each layer of a georeferenced database, producing a temporal series for

*This research has been funded by a FCAR grant awarded to Danielle J. Marceau. The authors want to thank Mr. Philippe Duplessis from the municipality of St-Eustache for his support and the access provided to the data required for this project.

the  geographic  area  of  interest.  Information about change is acquired based on difference calculations between the snapshots (Marceau, Marois, and Guindon 1995).

There are two crucially important problems with  this  model.  The  first  one  is  the  lack  of temporal topology. T emporal topology can be defined by the relationships between entities in time.  The  most  important  relation  is  order, which establishes the sequence of events that occur along a timeline extending from the past to the future. Order allows us to know that event A occurred  before,  after,  or  at  the  same  time  as event B (Frank 1998). More complex relationships also exist when describing the change of a single or several entities, such as appearance and disappearance, expansion, displacement, succession, split, and merge (Claramunt and Thériault 1996). The snapshot model does not explicitly capture such relationships. It enables the calculation of the rate of change between two moments in time, and provides information about the sequence of events captured at those specific moments for a geographic location. However, in such an approach change is represented, not by process, but by images of the results of process. T o be complete, an analysis of change not only needs to focus on the rate of change between  snapshots,  but  also  needs  to  emphasize the  dynamics-that  is,  the  processes  evolving through  time  that  induce  changes  (Chrisman 1998; Stead 1998).

The second major problem is related to temporal  sampling  interval.  Several  important  issues need to be addressed when dealing with a historical database. First, the choice of temporal sampling  interval  and  period  covered  for  the study of a geographic phenomenon will only reveal  information  that  is  specific  to  that  scale. Second, temporal sampling interval may affect the perception of the pattern dynamics of the phenomenon under investigation. As an example, a spatiotemporal pattern may appear linear at one temporal sampling interval and cyclic at another. Third, some changes may not be detected due to inappropriate sampling; if the interval  between snapshots is too long, a whole cycle of events may go undetected. Change may also be missed between snapshots where there has been a return to an earlier state (Chrisman 1998). Therefore, the question must be asked: how does the temporal sampling interval affect the perception and measurement of change?

This  study  has  been  conducted  to  address these questions. It was undertaken in collaboration with planners of the municipality of StEustache, a dynamic region located in the metropolitan area of Montreal in Quebec, Canada, that has been considerably transformed by urban expansion during the last four decades. The goal of the study was to provide the planners with  an  efficient,  user-friendly  GIS  tool  with which to manage an historical land-use database and retrieve essential information required for decision-making.  However,  the  proposed  approach can easily be adapted to a variety of applications in which temporal topology is required to capture the change of a phenomenon in a GIS database.  More  specifically,  the  study's  objectives are twofold:

- to develop an approach to building temporal  topology  in  an  historical  land-use GIS database that will enable spatiotemporal queries; and
- to  evaluate  the  impact  of  the  temporal sampling  interval  on  the  detection  and measurement of change that occurred in the area of interest.

## Creating a Spatiotemporal Database

The  study  area  is  centered  at  45 ° 34 ′ N  and 73 ° 55 ′ W and covers an area of 960 ha in the St-Eustache municipality, located about 6 km north of Montreal (Fig. 1). According to Statistics Canada,  the  population  of  St-Eustache  almost doubled between 1971 and 1981, due to urban expansion that affected the whole periphery of Montreal. Such growth created a constant pressure over agricultural lands. Illustrating this fact, two substantial annexations at the zone devoted to  urban  development  have  been  made  since the application of the agricultural zoning law in 1978 (Fig. 1). Such decisions raise fundamental questions for scientists and planners. What have the rate and direction of change in land use been over the last few decades? What impact do political decisions such as zoning laws have on this change? And what kind of economic activities should have priority in the immediate future?

In order to investigate the changes in land use in the area, a georeferenced spatiotemporal database was built to integrate multisource data for the period from 1958 to 1993. The first step involved  the  production  of  land-use  maps  from

Figure 1 Location of the study area.

<!-- image -->

aerial photographs in order to obtain a series of snapshots corresponding to eight different years of change of the study area. These photographs were  acquired  at  a  temporal  interval  of  about five years and at scales varying between 1:10,000 and 1:35,000. They were scanned and geometrically  registered  using  control  points  selected from a topographic map at the 1:20,000 scale. The spatial resolution of each mosaic produced was 1.67 m. Nine major land-use classes were identified on each mosaic; the main thoroughfare was also delineated.

Cadastral  maps  at  the  scale  of  1:1,000  and four  zoning  maps  corresponding  to  the  years 1965, 1975, 1983, and 1993 were also digitized and integrated into the database using ArcInfo and Mapinfo functionalities. The land-use maps were then superimposed on the cadastral maps to ensure the precision and accuracy of the landuse delineation. T o limit the problem of spuri- ous polygons generated in multiple representations  of  the  same  area  at  different  times,  the land-use map for the year 1958 was used as a template. Land-use maps for subsequent years were superimposed on the 1958 one, and only the frontiers that had changed during the time interval were registered. When required, spurious polygons were merged with the most appropriate land use. Zoning information was used to distinguish  some  land-use  classes  with  similar visual properties, such as fallow land and recreational parks. Field trips were also made to validate the photo interpretation.

## Building  T emporal  T opology

As previously mentioned, the use of a snapshot approach  to  analyze  land-use  dynamics  only provides information about the rate of change that  occurred  between  two  dates.  Since  no

explicit link exists in the database between snapshots, it is not possible to perform spatiotemporal queries that are of crucial interest for scientists and planners. These might include:

- what have the succession patterns in land use been over the last thirty years?
- how have agricultural lands changed since the zoning law?
- what is the spatial distribution of fallow lands over the time period covered?

Answering these questions with a limited number of geographical classes and layers still remains  relatively  easy.  However,  managing  the complexity of a large database necessitates the development of temporal topology and the use of temporal operators to establish, on a continuous  timeline,  the  order  of  the  sequence  of events that have occurred in the study area.

The first step in the development of temporal topology is to create a space-time composite map (Langran  and  Chrisman  1988).  Such  a  map  is produced  by  adding  to  the  first  land-use  map available  in  the  database,  corresponding  to  the year 1958, all the changes detected by successive comparisons with the subsequent land-use maps. This results in a representation of land use that decomposes over time into increasingly smaller fragments, each forming new polygons with attribute  histories  distinct  from  those  of  their neighbors. The history of each polygon is stored in the attribute table, linked to the space-time composite map. At this point, all the data are still temporally independent. T o build temporal  topology, it is necessary to incorporate the concepts of version and mutation.

In our model, time is represented by a linear

## a)discretedatainthetemporaldimension

- b) temporal topology

Figure 2 First level of temporal topology created from the discrete data contained in the attribute table of the space-time composite map.

<!-- image -->

continuum punctuated by mutations that cause new versions of an object stored in the database. Figure 2 illustrates these concepts. An object  on  the  space-time  composite  map  represents a specific portion of the study area. For each date registered in the database, a type of land-use corresponds to that object (Fig. 2a). If the  land  use  was  agricultural  in  1958,  1965, 1970, and 1975, we can conclude that this portion of the territory was agricultural from 1958 to 1975. This continuity is represented graphically by a continuous line of temporal topology, as  shown  in  Figure  2b.  We  assume  that  the probability  of  a  different  land  use  appearing and disappearing during those time intervals is very low. The same reasoning can be made for fallow land between 1983 and 1988. However, it can be seen that changes in land use occurred between 1975 and 1983 and between 1988 and 1993. Those intervals are represented by a discontinuous line on the figure. In such cases, the precise date of the mutation is not known.

When introducing the  concepts  of  version and mutation, it is possible to derive a first level of temporal information from the databasethat is, a map showing the succession of land uses.  Using  the  MapBasic  programming  language, a program was created to scan every line registered in the attribute table corresponding to  the  space-time  composite  map.  The  program starts reading the entries at column 1958 and ends at column 1993. Every time a change in the land use is detected, which represents a mutation, the information is stored in a resulting column. A new map can then be produced showing the succession patterns of the land use for the study area.

However,  this  program  does  not  yet  allow queries about the duration of a version of an object or about the succession of land uses in relation to a particular date. T o facilitate such queries, a series of variables representing topological concepts were used to characterize each version of every object existing in the space-time composite map. They include type , beginning , end , duration , beginning min , end max , and duration max.

The variable type is  used to register the landuse type. The variables beginning and end represent  the  first  and  last  year,  respectively,  in which a given land use has been observed. The variable duration indicates the minimum duration of the version; its value is obtained by subtracting  the  first  year  of  observation  from  the last  one.  The  variables beginning  min and end max are used to indicate the first and last year, re-

Figure 3 How the program builds temporal topology in the database.

<!-- image -->

spectively,  in  which  a  land-use  mutation  could have occurred between two snapshots of the database. As shown in Figure 2, we can conclude that a residential land-use could have started in 1989  and  existed  until  now.  The  value  of  the variable duration max is obtained by subtracting beginning  min from end  max. These  last  three variables allow us to manage uncertainty related to the discrete nature of the data composing the database. Duration and duration max define the possible lifetime of an event/phenomenon.

Figure  3  illustrates  the  functioning  of  the program created to build temporal topology in the database. Examples of the change of four entities  of  the  space-time  composite  map  are provided. During the first scan, the algorithm reads the raw data in the attribute table, performs some computation (such as the calculation of the duration of each version), and stores the results  in  the  tables  of  the  variables  previously described. The variable tables are subsequently scanned  to  provide  answers  to  spatiotemporal queries asked by the user. The procedure is repeated  to  obtain  information  about  each  ob- ject. The temporal topology is temporary, but the time required to perform the operation is very  short  (a  few  seconds  for  handling  a  few thousand  polygons).  The  major  advantage  of the  approach  is  that  the  program  is  highly adaptive to any changes in the database. Certain years may be selected, and land-use classes may  be  aggregated  or  generalized.  The  program can also manage an unlimited number of versions  for  every  object,  and  an  unlimited number of polygons.

Figure  4  provides  an  example  of  how  the program operates to provide answers to spatiotemporal queries asked by the user. The program scans the attribute table and analyses the temporal topology to verify if the variable type for versions 1 and 2 corresponds to agricultural and  fallow  lands,  respectively.  The  program must also check the condition of occurrence: before 1979 (the first year showing the effect of the agricultural zoning law on land use). Since a succession of versions exists, it is not necessary to verify if both versions occurred before 1979; only the verification for the second must

Figure 4 How the program performs spatiotemporal queries.

<!-- image -->

be done ( end version 2 &lt; 1979). It can be seen in Figure 4 that object 3 does not meet the condition and is therefore rejected. The last point to verify is if the object is always fallow land in 1979 ( beginning version 2 &lt; 1979 &lt; end version 2). Object 2 does not verify this last condition and is therefore also rejected.

Another example of a query is the search for the spatiotemporal entities that were commercial in 1960. In such a case, the program is used to manage uncertainty about the objects having a certain type of land use at a date that does not correspond to a snapshot available in the database. The answer to that query is twofold: the object was certainly commercial in 1960 (landuse type was commercial on the snapshots corresponding to the years 1958 and 1965), or the object was possibly commercial (land-use type is not commercial in 1958, but is commercial in 1965).  T o  obtain  these  results,  the  program analyses  all  the  objects  having  a  commercial land-use type as a version. The program checks if  the  conditions beginning &lt; 1960 &lt; end are met. If the answer is yes, the result is: certainly commercial. If the answer is no, the program checks the condition beginning max &lt; 1960 &lt; end max. If this condition is fulfilled, the result is then: possibly commercial.

These  queries  are  used  to  demonstrate  the potential of the program. There are, in fact, a large number of spatiotemporal queries that can be  answered,  considering  the  combinations  of versions and their temporal characteristics that can exist in the database. In such queries, temporal operators (before, after, during . . . ) can be combined with logical operators (and, or . . . ) and temporal limits (a specific date). The program can manage any kind of succession of versions, and can provide answers to complex queries involving a large number of versions.

Table 1 Land-Use Rate of Change in the Study Area

| Land Use     |   1958 (ha) |   1965 (ha) |   1970 (ha) |   1975 (ha) |   1979 (ha) |   1983 (ha) |   1988 (ha) |   1993 (ha) |
|--------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| Agricultural |      893.06 |      668.91 |      635.84 |      630.85 |      518.52 |      495.03 |      384.79 |      316.77 |
| Fallow land  |       78.76 |      210.61 |      201.72 |      161.23 |      184.35 |      179    |      194.5  |      206.01 |
| Residential  |       11.52 |       42.03 |       62.62 |       78.75 |      120.53 |      130.53 |      160.32 |      181.7  |
| Roads        |       27.53 |       75.69 |       84.35 |       96.42 |      119.87 |      121.31 |      125.77 |      135.76 |
| Forest       |       85.79 |       85.78 |       84.08 |       84.08 |       74.06 |       73.6  |       61.42 |       60.39 |
| Industrial   |        0    |        6.44 |       12.89 |       25.22 |       36.73 |       45.39 |       60.8  |       78.3  |
| Golf course  |        0    |        0    |        0    |        0    |        0    |        0    |       48.41 |       48.41 |
| Commercial   |        0.95 |        5.33 |       11.06 |       13.92 |       20.02 |       26.49 |       32.5  |       39.96 |
| Services     |        0    |        2.96 |        5.03 |        5.03 |       22.95 |       23.99 |       26.79 |       28.02 |

## Analysis of the Land-Use Changes

The first level of information about the landuse  changes  that  can  be  extracted  from  the database is the rate of change (T able 1). While the study area was mainly agricultural in 1958, it was mostly urban in 1993. The area devoted to  agricultural  activities  decreased  from  893 ha in 1958 to 316 ha in 1993 (a diminution of 65 percent). Fallow land mostly appeared between 1958 and 1965 (the area increased from 78  ha  to  200  ha),  and  remained  stable  until 1993. The proportion of industrial and commercial  land  uses  regularly  increased.  Residential area gradually expanded, with a considerable development between 1975 and 1978, prior  to  the  application  of  the  agricultural zoning law.

A second level of information is provided by the  combination  of  the  land-use  maps  and  the zoning maps. This relationship is very helpful in understanding some land-use changes that happened due to the application of zoning regulations. T able 2 reveals that, in 1965, land use and zoning were in accordance and mainly agricultural. In 1975, zoning was modified to promote the  development  of  residential  and  industrial land use on a large portion of agricultural lands. However, most of this territory remained agricultural.  In  1983,  following  the  application  of the law for protecting the agricultural lands in  Quebec,  another  zoning  modification  was made to preserve agricultural activities in that portion of the territory; T able 2 shows that the amount of agricultural lands increased from 120 ha to 316 ha.

At the same time, the urban expansion was concentrated  in  the  northwest  section  of  the study  area.  In  1975,  management  decisions were taken to promote residential and indus-

Table 2 Most Important Land Uses, Derived from Combination of Land-Use and Zoning Maps

| Land Use           |   1965 (ha) |   1975 (ha) |   1983 (ha) |   1993 (ha) |
|--------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|
| Agricultural       |      610.44 |      120.44 |      316.87 |      315.85 |
| Not agricultural a |        8.61 |       54.2  |       36.26 |       37.28 |
| Commercial         |        4.99 |       10.85 |       25.83 |       39.23 |
| Not commercial a   |       17.57 |       70.57 |       46.97 |       33.41 |
| Industrial         |        6.46 |       24.99 |       45.3  |       77.9  |
| Not industrial a   |      108    |      136.92 |       78.21 |       44.97 |
| Residential        |       38.22 |       72.76 |      126.14 |      176.47 |
| Not residential a  |      107.19 |      425.98 |      193.47 |      129.82 |

- a The term 'not' before a land-use type indicates a situation in which the land use does not correspond to zoning

trial  expansion  over  the  agricultural  lands.  In 1983 and 1993, zoning for urban expansion was reduced  to  protect  some  agricultural  sectors, and  the  zoning  became  more  in  accordance with the effective land use.

A third level of information is provided by the analysis of the land-use successions. This requires the use of temporal topology to detect the  ordered  sequence  of  versions  and  mutations. Eleven different types of successions occurred between 1958 and 1993. In some portions of the study area, there is a succession of three  land  uses,  while  other  portions  remain stable over thirty-five years. It is interesting to observe the role played by fallow land. Fallow land  is  a  transitional  land  use.  Very  few  portions of the territory remained fallow land for 35 years, but this land use appeared in several categories of succession.

The information acquired so far about the land-use dynamics is still incomplete, because the  dates  and  the  duration  of  the  mutations from  one  version  to  another  are  not  known. Figure 5 presents a series of results obtained from spatiotemporal  queries  in  relation  to  more complex aspects of land-use dynamics. The objective of the first query is to measure the importance of the change of agricultural lands to fallow lands before the application of the agricultural zoning law in 1978. It can be seen that the  portions  of  the  territory  affected  by  such change have a small area and are located close to existing urban areas. One exception exists in the northeast part of the study area, where fallow lands are large enough to be used for agricultural  activities.  The  objective  of  the  second query is to verify whether the agricultural zoning law stimulated the conversion of fallow lands into agricultural lands. The answer is that no portion of the territory that was fallow land was transformed into agricultural lands after 1979 until 1993. The objective of the third query is to evaluate  the  proportion  of  agricultural  lands that evolved into fallow land after the application of the zoning law. The results obtained revealed that such cases occurred in several portions of the territory. Some were too small to be effectively used for agricultural activities, while others represented a real loss for agriculture.

The final two queries illustrate other aspects of the land-use dynamics in relation to the duration of a version. Since some information is missing between consecutive snapshots, the answer to these queries is provided in terms of degrees of certainty. In the first case, the resulting map illustrates areas that were possibly or certainly fallow land for twenty years. In the second case,  the  resulting  map  shows  the  number  of years during which fallow lands persisted in the territory.

These examples demonstrate the potential of  the  approach  developed  in  this  study  to build  temporal  topology  in  order  to  analyze land-use changes. It should be noted that the temporal  criteria  used  in  the  queries  could have been combined to spatial criteria. For example, to reveal the fallow lands in which agricultural activities are still suitable, criteria such as  minimum  area  and/or  rectangular  shape could be used.

## The Impact of  T emporal Sampling Interval

To evaluate the impact of temporal sampling interval on the measurement of change that occurred in the St-Eustache area, a map of pattern succession involving three land-use types was produced at a temporal sampling interval of five, ten, and twenty years respectively. Results reveal that a significant amount of change is progressively lost when degrading the sampling  interval  (Fig.  6).  When  an  interval  of twenty  years  is  used,  the  pattern  successions detected  represent  an  area  of  only  4,919  ha, compared to an area of 14,007 ha and 17,165 ha using sampling intervals of ten years and five years respectively (T able 3). Considerable differences also occur in the proportion of pattern successions in relation to the choice of temporal sampling interval. As an example, the succession  of  agriculture  to  fallow  to  industrial  land

554

Figure 5 Illustration of spatiotemporal queries performed with the program.

<!-- image -->

Sampling interval : approximately 5 years

<!-- image -->

Figure 6 Illustration of the impact of temporal sampling interval on the detection of pattern succession.

Table 3 The Impact of the Temporal Sampling Interval on the Measurement of Pattern Succession

|                                      | Temporal Sampling Interval   | Temporal Sampling Interval   | Temporal Sampling Interval   |
|--------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
| Pattern Succession                   | 5Years Surface (ha)          | 10Years Surface (ha)         | 20Years Surface (ha)         |
| Agriculture to fallow to road        | 1,938 11.3%                  | 1,560 11.1%                  | 426 8.7%                     |
| Agriculture to fallow to residential | 6,816 39.7%                  | 6,123 43.7%                  | 2,075 42.2%                  |
| Agriculture to fallow                |                              | 2,518                        |                              |
| to commercial                        | 2,521 14.7                   | 18.0                         | 1,847 37.5%                  |
| Agriculture to fallow to             | 5,890                        | 3,806                        | 571                          |
| industrial                           |                              |                              |                              |
|                                      | 34.3%                        | 27.2%                        | 11.6%                        |
| Total                                | 17,165                       | 14,007                       | 4,919                        |

represents  34.3  percent  of  the  territory  when measured  at  a  sampling  interval  of  five  years. This proportion decreases to 27.2 percent when measured at ten years, and 11.6 percent when measured at twenty years. The proportion of the succession of agriculture to fallow to commercial land appears relatively high (37.5 percent) at the twenty-year interval, compared to the tenyear (18 percent) and five-year (14.7 percent) interval. This is due to the fact that a significant amount of other changes are not detected within the twenty-year interval, creating an overrepresentation for this particular pattern.

This example provides only one illustration among many possible ones of the importance of selecting the appropriate temporal sampling interval  when  interpreting  the  dynamics  of change in a geographical area. A comprehensive sensitivity analysis could be done to investigate  the  impact  on  the  results  generated  by spatiotemporal queries addressed to a database when different temporal sampling intervals are used. It is expected that results may vary significantly.  This  problem  goes  often  undetected, because  many  studies  are  constrained  by  the availability  of  data  at  arbitrarily  defined  moments in time. The message conveyed by this study is that considerable attention should always be devoted to the interpretation of results in relation to the temporal sampling interval in use. A short interval might be required for specific areas that have been affected by rapid and/ or  frequent  changes,  while  a  longer  interval might  be  appropriate  for  less  dynamic  areas. Ideally, a temporal database should provide the users with the possibility of selecting an appro- priate sampling interval in accordance with the rate of change in the areas under investigation.

## Conclusion

This study aimed to develop a set of programming tools incorporated into a GIS to manage temporal information. An historical database of a rural-urban  region  in  Quebec  was  built,  comprising a series of eight land-use maps as well as zoning and cadastral maps covering the period from 1958 to 1993. A program was then created using the MapBasic language to extract temporal topology from this set of discrete data in order to address spatiotemporal queries to the database.

The program provides many benefits. It can be  implemented  into  the  currently  commercially available software MapInfo and run on a microcomputer. It is  highly  adaptive  and  can handle  an  unlimited  number  of  versions  for each object in the database. It can be used for a variety  of  applications  in  which  a  historical database is built and in which temporal topology  is  required  to  detect  changes  and  trends over time. It can also easily be adopted in the context  of  database  production  and  maintenance for tracking changes when updates are made.  Improvements  to  the  original  approach, such as the use of fuzzy logic or probabilistic rules to manage uncertainty, can be implemented, as can the use of variable temporal sampling intervals in accordance with the rate of change in the study area.

In this study, different types of temporal information  were  extracted  from  the  database, such as the rate of change, the relationship between  land-use  changes  and  zoning  regulations, and land-use successions. A series of spatiotemporal  queries  were  also  performed  to investigate the land-use changes of the area in more  detail.  Finally,  the  impact  of  temporal sampling  interval  on  the  detection  and  measurement of pattern succession was evaluated. The results showed that the integration of temporal information into a GIS offers a new range of possibilities for understanding the dynamics of geographical phenomena.

However, several challenges still need to be addressed. T o overcome the problem of inadequate sampling in an historical database, a spatiotemporal  interpolation  method  based  on fuzzy set theory has been proposed to generate intermediate  layers  between  consecutive  snap-

shots in a GIS database (Dragicevic and Marceau 1999, 2000). Such an approach offers the possibility  of  generating  scenarios  to  simulate  the dynamics of change between the known states that are registered in the database at a desired temporal  sampling  interval.  Further  work  is also  in  progress  in  which  an  object-oriented data model is being developed to monitor spatial and temporal changes in individual objects evolving within a geographical area. /H17039

## Literature Cited

- ArcInfo. Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI), Redlands, CA. http://www.esri.com (last accessed 13 July 2001).
- Cheylan, J. P ., and S. Lardon. 1993. T oward a conceptual model for the analysis of spatiotemporal processes.  In Spatial  information  theory ,  ed.  A. Frank and I. Campari, 158-76. Berlin: SpringerVerlag.
- Chrisman, N. R. 1998. Beyond the snapshot: Changing the approach to change, error, and process. In Spatial and temporal reasoning in geographic information systems , ed. M. J. Egenhofer and R. G. Golledge, 85-93. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Claramunt, C., C. Parent, and M. Thériault. 1998. Design patterns for spatiotemporal processes. In Data mining and reverse engineering: Searching for semantics ,  ed.  S.  Spaccapietra  and  F .  Maryanski, 455-75. London: Chapman and Hall.
- Claramunt, C., and M. Thériault. 1996. T owards semantics  for  modeling  spatiotemporal  processes within GIS. In Advances in GIS research II: Proceedings of the seventh international symposium on spatial data  handling ,  12-16 August, Delft, The Netherlands, ed. M. J. Kraak and M. Molenaar, 2.27-2.43.
- Couclelis, H. 1999. Space, time, geography. In Geographic information systems: Principles and techniques , ed. P .  Longley, M. F. Goodchild, D. J. Maguire, and D. W. Rhind, 29-38. New York: John Wiley &amp; Sons.
- Dragicevic, S., and D. J. Marceau. 1999. Spatiotemporal interpolation and fuzzy logic for GIS simulation  of  rural-urban  transition. Cartography  and GIS 26 (2):125-37.
- ---. 2000.  A  fuzzy  set  approach  for  modeling time in GIS. International Journal of Geographic Information Science 14 (3):225-45.
- Edwards, G., P. Gagnon, and Y. Bédard. 1993. Spatial-temporal topology and causal mechanisms in time-integrated GIS: From conceptual model to implementation  strategies.  In Proceedings  of  the Canadian Conference on GIS '93 , Ottawa, Canada, 842-57.
- Frank, A. U. 1998. Different types of times in GIS. In Spatial and temporal reasoning in geographic informa-
- tion systems ,  ed.  M.  J.  Egenhofer  and  R.  G. Golledge, 40-62. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Jensen, C. S., J. Clifford, S. K. Gadia, A. Segev, and R.  T.  Snodgrass.  1992.  A  glossary  of  temporal database concepts. Sigmod Record 21 (3):35-43.
- Kelmelis, J. A. 1998. Process dynamics, temporal extent, and causal propagation as the basis for linking space and time. In Spatial and temporal reasoning in  geographic  information  systems ,  ed.  M.  J.  Egenhofer and R. G. Golledge, 94-103. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Langran, G. 1992. Time in geographic information systems. London: Taylor and Francis.
- Langran, G., and N. R. Chrisman. 1988. A framework for temporal geographic information. Cartographica 25 (3):1-14.
- MapInfo.  MapInfo  Corporation,  Troy,  NY.  http:// www.mapinfo.com (last accessed 9 July 2001).
- Marceau,  D.  J.,  and  S.  Dragicevic.  1998.  Linking space and time to model the dynamics of change in a  rural-urban  environment.  In Proceedings  of  the Modeling Complex Systems Conference ,  12-17 July, New Orleans, LA, 44-48.
- Marceau, D. J., C. Marois, and L. Guindon. 1995. Integrating multisource and multiscale spatial data in a GIS to model the land-use change in a ruralurban fringe. In Proceedings of the 9th Annual Symposium on GIS , 27-30 March, Vancouver, Canada, 334-39.
- Mioc, D., F. Anton, C. Gold, and B. Moulin. 1999. Time  travel  visualization  in  a  dynamic  Voronoi data structure. Cartography and GIS 26 (2):99-108.
- Peuquet,  D.  J.  1994.  It' s  about  time:  A  conceptual framework for  the  representation  of  temporal  dynamics in geographic information systems. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 84 (3):441-61.
- Peuquet, D., and N. Duan. 1995. An event-based spatiotemporal  data  model  (ESTDM)  for  temporal analysis of geographical data. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 9 (1):7-24.
- Statistics  Canada.  http://www.statcan.ca/  (last  accessed 26 June 2001).
- Stead,  S.  D.  1998.  T emporal  dynamics  and  geographic information systems. In Spatial and temporal  reasoning  in  geographic  information  systems ,  ed. M. J. Egenhofer and R. G. Golledge, 214-19. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Vasiliev, I. R. 1997. Mapping time. Cartographica 34 (2):1-51.
- Worboys, M. F. 1998. A generic model for spatiobitemporal geographic information. In Spatial and temporal reasoning in geographic information systems , M. J. Egenhofer and R. G. Golledge, 25-39. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Zaniolo, C., S. Ceri, C. Faloutsos, R. Snodgrass, V. Subrahmanian, and R. Zicari. 1997. Advanced database  systems. San  Francisco:  Morgan  Kaufmann Publishers.

DANIELLE J. MARCEAU is an Associate Professor in Geomatics in the Department of Geography at the University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C 3J7. E-mail: Danielle.marceau@umontreal.ca. Her  research  interests  involve  the  development  of spatiotemporal object-oriented GIS  databases  for land-use changes and transportation modeling, multiscale analysis of landscapes based on scale-space theory,  and  forest  modeling  using  an  object-oriented individual-based model.

MIREILLE BRUEL is completing her master's thesis in the Department of Geography at the University  of  Montreal,  Montreal,  Quebec,  Canada  H3C 3J7.  E-mail:  bruelm@magellan.umontreal.ca.  Her research project involves the development of a spatiotemporal database using an object-oriented GIS to understand the dynamics of land-use changes in an agro-forested region in southwest Quebec.

LUC GUINDON completed his master's thesis in geomatics in 1997 in the Department of Geography at  the  University  of  Montreal,  Montreal,  Quebec, Canada  H3C  3J7.  E-mail:  lguindon@exchange.cfl. forestry.ca. He is currently working at Forestry Canada in Quebec City as a specialist in GIS and forest modeling.

CLAUDE MAROIS is a Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3C  3J7. E-mail: claude.marois@umontreal.ca. He has published several articles and books on urban agriculture, urban sociodemographic  changes,  and  methodology.  His primary research interests are in urban fringe change,  sociodemographic  transformations  at  the metropolitan scale, and epistemology.