## Urban Indicators of China from Radiance-Calibrated Digital DMSP-OLS Nighttime Images

C. P. Lo

Department of Geography, University of Georgia

A composite of cloud-free radiance-calibrated Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP)-Operational Linescan System (OLS) nighttime images of China acquired between March 1996 and January-February 1997 in 30-arc-second grids in byte format is evaluated for its usefulness in extracting urban indicators data of China. With the aid of image-processing and Environmental Systems Research Institute's ArcView GIS software with 3-D Analysis extension, zonal variations of radiance were extracted and three-dimensional models created using Triangulated Irregular Network (TIN) functionality for thirty-five cities. Two variables were extracted from the TIN model: surface area and volume. These were used separately as independent variables in the form of an allometric growth model to estimate the following urban indicators for individual Chinese cities: nonagricultural population, gross domestic product (GDP), built-up area, and electricity consumption. The estimates obtained were checked against data supplied by the Statistical Bureau of China for 1997, the same period during which the DMSP-OLS images were acquired. It was found that urban indicators of acceptable accuracy could be obtained, provided that cities designated as Special Economic Zones (SEZs) were excluded. Volume appeared to be slightly better than surface area in estimating these urban indicators. In all cases, total nonagricultural population for all the cities combined could be very accurately estimated, indicating the usefulness of the radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime images to determine the level of urbanization in China. The three-dimensional TIN model portrays an illuminated urban area (IUA) dome, the shape of which is affected by the internal structure of the city. The core of the city invariably exhibits the highest level of light intensity in the DMSP-OLS nighttime image. However, only a very limited amount of land-use information could be extracted. The image was also found to be useful in detecting the special urban phenomenon in China known as the extended metropolitan region, in which rural and urban uses intermixed and small towns developed. In conclusion, despite the low spatial resolution, the radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime images are capable of providing useful demographic and socioeconomic data for cities. Key Words: allometric growth models, Chinese cities, urban indicators, radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime image, Triangulated Irregular Network.

efense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP)Operational Linescan System (OLS) nighttime images have been available since 1973 (Brandli 1978). The OLS is one of the remote sensing systems carried on board the DMSP satellites, which revolve around the Earth in a near-polar, sun-synchronous orbit at an altitude of approximately 830 km with an orbital period of about 101 minutes, thus providing nearly complete global coverage every six hours. The main purpose of these satellites is to collect data on the atmosphere, ocean, and solar-geophysical environment of the Earth. The OLS, which is an oscillating scan radiometer, monitors the distribution  of  clouds  and  cloud  top  temperatures  twice daily, once during the day and once at night, using two spectral bands (visible near infrared and thermal infrared) covering a swath of about 3,000 km in width. It consists  of  two  telescopes  and  a  photo  multiplier  tube (PMT). The PMT, which can detect radiation in the visible and near-infrared wavelength region of 0.47-0.95 𝛍 m under very weak lighting conditions, produced these nighttime images (Elvidge et al. 1997b). These images D

can be acquired in the full nominal spatial resolution of 0.56 km-the fine mode. These fine-mode data are averaged  on  board  using  five-by-five  blocks,  resulting  in  a nominal spatial resolution of 2.7 km-the smooth mode. Most of the OLS data available are in the smooth mode (Elvidge et al. 1997a).

The OLS sensor picked up lights of features on Earth at night at the global scale. The most famous of these images is the composite nighttime view of the continental United States published in the paper by Croft (1978). The U.S. Census Bureau has also produced a nighttime population distribution map of the U.S. for 1970 similar in appearance to the DMSP nighttime image. Unfortunately, these DMSP image data were available only in photographic format as single frames or orbits. In mid1992, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration  (NOAA)  established  a  digital  archive  for  the DMSP program at its National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC) (Elvidge et al. 1997b). This allows the production of DMSP-OLS digital images by compositing hundreds of orbital swaths acquired at different times. The

NGDC developed a method that collects, rectifies, and aggregates  a  large  number  of  nighttime  DMSP-OLS nighttime images and makes use of a time-series of images to distinguish stable lights produced by cities, towns, and industrial facilities from ephemeral lights caused by fires and lightning (Imhoff et al. 1997b). The time series also  ensures  that  sufficient  cloud-free  observations  are included to produce a composite, resampled to a 1-km reference  grid.  Therefore,  the  most  common  form  of DMSP-OLS nighttime data available consists of pixels showing 'percent lighted' values, with digital numbers varying from 0 to 100. They are also known as the 'light frequency' data.

The availability of new digital DMSP-OLS nighttime data has prompted renewed research interests. Most of these  research  efforts  have  focused  on  using  the  OLS nighttime images to map human settlements or to estimate  population  at  the  continental  and  global  levels (Elvidge  et  al.  1997a).  For  example,  Sutton  and  colleagues (1997) have produced a new composite DMSPOLS nighttime image of the continental U.S. from 231 orbits of the nighttime passes acquired between October 1994 and March 1995, and compared it with the population density data produced from a gridded vector dataset of the 1992 U.S. census-block-group polygons, showing strong  correlations  between  the  areas  of  light  clusters and their associated populations. In addition, the DMSPOLS nighttime data were also found to be strongly correlated  with  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  and  electric power consumption, so that they can be used to help determine the level of a country's economic development (Elvidge et al. 1997c). They can also be used as a tool to map greenhouse gas emissions (notably CO 2 ) at the global level (Doll, Muller, and Elvidge 2000). Because cities give out lights at night, the DMSP-OLS nighttime data are best suited to map urban areas, as demonstrated by Imhoff  et  al.  (1997b)  using  a  threshold  of  89  percent lighted, which produced urban areas in the U.S. only 5 percent less than the urban areas reported by the census. Finally, by intersecting the DMSP-OLS nighttime data with the FAO Digital Soils Map of the World, the conflict  between  urban  and  agricultural  land  use  was  revealed for the U.S. (Imhoff et al. 1997a).

The availability of the DMSP-OLS nighttime data in digital form has greatly improved their accessibility for the whole world. The data can be used to estimate and update  demographic  and  socioeconomic  data  in  any country. Indeed, they can help improve the accuracy of a global  population  database  being  developed  under  the LandScan  Global  Population  Project  (Dobson  et  al. 2000). The United Nations Centre for Human Settlements  has  established  the  Global  Urban  Observatory, actively seeking to collect urban indicators data for cities in  the  world.  Thus,  the  DMSP-OLS nighttime images will be useful for the extraction of urban indicators of cities.

However, in doing so, it is necessary to get into greater spatial detail for individual cities in the images. Most of the research reported above is global in scale, using individual countries as units. The only detailed treatment of a country is that of the U.S., which exhibits the largest electric power consumption in the world (Elvidge et al. 1997c). In this research, a non-Western cultural environment-China-is employed to evaluate the potential use of DMSP-OLS nighttime data for urban analysis. China is a country with a similar land area to that of the U.S., but it has a population about 4.5 times that of the U.S. Many scholars are interested in the level of urbanization of China, as well as in the size of its urban population. Since Deng Xiaoping implemented economic reforms and an open policy in 1979, China's economy has advanced rapidly (Shen 2000). China has also relaxed its internal migration control, resulting in growth in size of towns and cities (Ma 1996). As a result of the open policy,  China  has  published  demographic  and  socioeconomic statistics of cities on an annual basis in an easily available form, making it an ideal site for the evaluation. The main objectives of this article are, therefore: (1) to evaluate  the  potential  of  the  DMSP-OLS  nighttime image  data  for  the  extraction  of  urban  indicators  in China, and (2) to determine the extent to which city morphology and land use can be revealed from these image data.

## Data Used

The DMSP-OLS nighttime image data of China used in  this  research  are  different  from  the  light-frequency data used in research reported in the previous section. Because of the need to focus on the internal structure of individual  cities,  the  radiance-calibrated  DMSP-OLS low-light  imaging  data  are  preferred  (Elvidge  et  al. 1999). The China data used for this research are a composite of cloud-free radiance-calibrated 'low-gain' data acquired  between  March  1996  and  January-February 1997  in  30-arc-second  grids.  The  light-frequency  data suffer from 'blooming' caused by saturation of a pixel even with very weak light source, causing urban areas to be exaggerated (Imhoff et al. 1997b). The radiance-calibrated data have been specially acquired using gain settings alternating between 24 dB and 50 dB, which produce radiance values ranging from 1.54 × 10 -9  W cm -2 sr -1 𝛍 m -1 to 3.17 × 10 -7  W cm -2 sr -1 𝛍 m -1 . The low-gain settings

Figure  1. Radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime composite image of China acquired between March 1996 and January-February 1997.

<!-- image -->

help  minimize  blooming in  the  images.  The  radiancecalibrated OLS data have been found to provide spatial detail related to the brightness variations within urban centers. In addition, they also exhibit low levels of 'diffuse lighting' in densely populated rural environments (Elvidge et al. 1999).

As  supplied  by  NOAA,  the  China  radiance-calibrated OLS nighttime data have been processed by an algorithm which (1) resampled the images to a consistent reference  grid,  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space Administration-United States Geological Survey Global 1-km Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer interrupted Goode Homolosine Projection (Steinwand 1993), (2) established a local threshold based on background brightness levels to identify lights from major cities  and  towns  under  a  wide  range  of  conditions,  (3) geolocated  lights,  clouds,  and  the  coverage  polygons using  an  oblate  ellipsoid  model  of  sea  level,  (4)  converted  the  radiance  values  to  digital  number  (DN)  in byte format with values between 0 and 255, (5) produced composite images within high- ( &gt; 30 dB) and low- ( &lt; 30 dB) gain ranges, (6) filtered the high- and low-gain composite images to eliminate detection that occurred once (that  is,  ephemeral  events,  such  as  fires  or  lightning), and (7) combined the high- and low-gain composites together  by  averaging  their  radiance  calibrated  digital numbers, which were then weighted by the total number of detections (Elvidge et al. 1999).

The radiance-calibrated OLS nighttime image data of China directly  depict  the  energy  level  emitted  by  the city (Figure 1). The DN value of the data varies from 0 to 166, with a mean of 12.52, a median of 10, and a mode of 9. Therefore, the frequency distribution curve is highly skewed to the left (the lower-value side) (Figure 2).

Administrative boundary data of China at the provincial and county levels in 1:1 million scale (in Arc/Info format) were obtained from the Consortium for International  Earth  Science  Information  Network  (CIESIN) (2001). A total of thirty-five major cities, at least one from each province, were selected for this study (Table 1).  Included in the list  are  the  three  municipalities  of Beijing, Tianjin, and Shanghai. For each of the thirtyfive cities, the following urban indicators were extracted from Zhongguo  Chengshi  Tongji  Nianjian  1997 (Urban Statistical  Yearbook  of  China  1997)  (State  Statistical Bureau 1998): (1) nonagricultural population of the urban district ( shiqu ), 1   (2) area of the shiqu, (3) built-up area ( jianchengqu ), 2  and (4) GDP of 1996 for the shiqu. However, for the three municipalities, which have the political status of provinces and administer a large rural area, the nonagricultural population for the administrative district ( diqu ) 3  was used instead. Finally, electricity

Figure 2. Frequency distribution graph of DN values of the DMSPOLS nighttime image of China shown in Figure 1.

<!-- image -->

consumption in kilowatt-hours for the shiqu was available  only  for  1990.  With  the  exception  of  electricity consumption, all other vital urban statistics coincide in time within the period of DMSP-OLS image-data acquisition (1996-1997). It is very important to realize at the outset  that  the  size  of  urban  population  in  China  depends on how a city is defined administratively, as well as on whether the population living within the city holds a nonagricultural  household  ( hukou )  registration  (Chan and Xu 1985). No scholars on China can agree on the actual urban population size in China, which is why the present research can shed light on this problem.

## Extracting Surface Areas and Volumes of City Lights from DMSP-OLS Data

It  appeared  from  visual  examination  of  the  DMSPOLS nighttime image of China that the shapes and sizes of  cities  correspond quite closely to the configurations and areal extents of the light clusters. Each light cluster exhibits different levels of light intensity. Based on previous research by Elvidge et al. (1997c), the variation seems to depend on the level of economic development of  the  city.  A  city  that  exhibits  bright  light  consumes more electricity  and  hence  is  better  developed  than  a

city that shows weak light. Previous research by Welch and Zupko (1980) introduced the concept of illuminated urban area (IUA) dome volume, which incorporated the light intensity (as a series of microdensitometer scan profiles) with the areal extent of the light cluster of a city. The digital OLS data facilitate the extraction of the IUA dome with a much higher degree of accuracy with the aid of GIS and image processing software.

Using ArcView GIS equipped with spatial-analyst and image-analyst extensions, the OLS image data of China were  reprojected  from  the  geographic  coordinates  into Lambert conic conformal projection so that they could be registered with the provincial and county boundary data of China. The image data were then converted into a grid theme.  The  administrative  boundary  of  each  of  the thirty-five cities was extracted from the county boundary file. By overlaying each city's boundary shapefile with the OLS image grid file, using the clip (cookie-cutter) functionality, the DNs of the image within the city boundary were extracted. Using the digital numbers in the clipped image file of the city, a three-dimensional model was created by means of the Triangular Irregular Network (TIN) function of the 3-D analyst extension of ArcView GIS (Figure 3). By using TIN, DNs indicating brightness in the OLS nighttime image were treated as altitudes of the terrain. The terrain model created by TIN is equivalent to the IUA dome volume mentioned above. Two types of statistics were extracted from the 3-D model: (1) surface area and (2) volume. Because these measure the sizes of light clusters, DNs with a zero value should not be included. In this study, the minimum DN recorded for each city was used; this varied mostly between 6 and 8. The

Table 1. Data for Thirty-five Large Chinese Cities Selected for This Study

| City                |      SURFAREA |         VOLUME |    NAGPOP |       BUA |              GDP |   ELECTRIC |
|---------------------|---------------|----------------|-----------|-----------|------------------|------------|
| Beijing a           | 6,095,673,635 | 60,872,206,933 | 7,097,000 |       488 |      1.61573e+07 |     117.14 |
| Changchun           |   792,507,920 |  8,315,496,143 | 1,987,600 |       145 |      3.1337e+06  |      21.9  |
| Changsha            |   193,208,032 |  2,265,714,871 | 1,300,400 |       110 |      2.4957e+06  |      10.62 |
| Chengdu405,915,253  | 2,998,894,339 |      2,050,500 |       138 | 4,353,435 |     25.76        |            |
| Chongqing           |   349,451,171 |  2,649,871,205 | 2,811,100 |       184 |      4.9985e+06  |      38.18 |
| Dalian              |   543,532,499 |  6,019,675,596 | 1,909,500 |       227 |      5.14468e+06 |      37.47 |
| Fuzhou              |   391,163,057 |  6,908,631,752 | 1,008,100 |        71 |      3.00735e+06 |      15.59 |
| Guangzhou           | 1,180,757,055 | 21,157,337,703 | 3,221,400 |       262 |      1.02915e+07 |      36.47 |
| Guiyang             |   288,854,610 |  2,532,618,844 | 1,185,000 |        86 |      1.39616e+06 |      27.05 |
| Ha`erbin            | 1,082,076,810 |  9,045,094,348 | 2,553,400 |       220 |      3.3889e+06  |      28.32 |
| Haikou145,473,415   | 2,320,139,003 |        405,800 |        34 |   988,686 |      2.86        |            |
| Hangzhou381,110,071 | 6,537,818,587 |      1,287,600 |       105 | 4,565,711 |     21.58        |            |
| Hefei               |   294,383,926 |  3,842,045,306 |   929,800 |       120 |      1.43352e+06 |      15.19 |
| Huhehaote           |   708,999,328 |  4,630,585,258 |   707,800 |        78 | 820803           |       9.53 |
| Ji`nan              |   839,311,232 |  6,872,927,884 | 1,682,600 |       114 |      3.91326e+06 |      31.13 |
| Kunming             |   594,755,350 |  9,437,093,378 | 1,284,800 |       110 |      3.31814e+06 |      20.16 |
| Lanzhou664,977,127  | 6,658,601,612 |      1,374,800 |       163 | 1,957,125 |     78.37        |            |
| Nanchang            |   217,588,717 |  2,582,406,635 | 1,215,800 |        86 |      2.13774e+06 |      18.37 |
| Nanjing             |   799,260,902 |  8,504,328,141 | 2,298,500 |       167 |      5.11039e+06 |      48.06 |
| Nanning             |   285,034,942 |  2,900,760,239 |   894,900 |        85 |      1.39575e+06 |       9.07 |
| Ningbo              |   134,713,784 |  2,415,080,651 |   653,700 |        63 |      2.94608e+06 |      12.87 |
| Qingdao             |   826,184,495 |  7,837,388,205 | 1,701,400 |       110 |      3.91326e+06 |      26.15 |
| Shanghai a          | 4,579,759,346 | 62,530,771,948 | 9,321,400 |       412 |      2.9022e+07  |     171.72 |
| Shenyang            | 1,427,364,318 | 12,004,976,497 | 3,840,000 |       200 |      6.61204e+06 |      48.47 |
| Shenzhen            |   852,228,107 | 14,744,425,756 |   789,100 |       101 |      9.50045e+06 |      17.28 |
| Shijiazhuang        |    21,522,681 |  3,019,106,116 | 1,266,800 |       101 |      2.52145e+06 |      29.03 |
| Taiyuan             | 1,060,710,632 |  9,025,904,646 | 1,721,000 |       168 |      2.44248e+06 |      46.21 |
| Tianjin a           | 8,536,086,739 | 47,319,881,721 | 5,131,500 |       374 |      1.1024e+07  |     104.58 |
| Wuhan               |   824,251,692 |  9,894,952,419 | 3,820,800 |       202 |      6.8185e+06  |      65.92 |
| Wulumuqi            |   701,620,242 |  5,330,744,066 | 1,193,300 |        83 |      1.87408e+06 |      19.59 |
| Xi`an               |   613,884,389 |  7,127,080,901 | 2,205,900 |       148 |      3.22593e+06 |      33.34 |
| Xiamen              |   382,617,573 |  5,194,764,999 |   492,900 |        61 |      2.58131e+06 |       7.84 |
| Xining              |   229,678,042 |  1,868,590,117 |   586,700 |        53 | 461174           |      13.17 |
| Yinchuan            |   315,814,345 |    242,936,168 |   437,700 |        44 | 528582           |       7.74 |
| Zhengzhou           |   696,728,044 |  6,177,070,684 | 1,388,200 |       113 |      2.39458e+06 |      32.3  |

Notes: SURFAREA = surface area of the TIN model of a city in square meters extracted from DMSP-OLS image. VOLUME = volume of the TIN model of the city (square meters × DN) extracted from OLS image. NAGPOP = nonagricultural population of the urban district ( shiqu ) for 1997. BUA = built-up area ( jianchengqu ) in km 2  in 1997. GDP = gross domestic product in 10,000 yuan in the shiqu for 1996. ELECTRIC = consumption of electricity in 100-million kilowatt-hours in the shiqu in 1990.

a For the three municipalities of Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin, all data except electricity consumption refer to the administrative district ( diqu ).

Figure 3. Three-dimensional TIN model of radiance of the Beijing municipality.  Also  shown  are  two  perspective  views  of  the  TIN model. Note the sharp peak corresponding to the city core in the model. This represents the IUA dome. Compare this with a map of the built-up area of the city. The approximate boundary of the builtup area shown on the map is marked on the TIN map.

<!-- image -->

surface area is different from the plan area because it takes into account the height information (i.e., brightness, in this case) by measuring along the slope of a surface. The surface area and volume data extracted for the thirty-five cities are shown in Table 1.

To investigate the usefulness of the surface area and volume statistics, a Pearson correlation was conducted for the thirty-five cities. The results show that the volume of light over the city is very strongly correlated with nonagricultural population ( r = 0.91), GDP ( r = 0.91), built-up  area  ( r = 0.91),  and  electricity  consumption ( r = 0.86), all significant at a level of over 99.9 percent. Surface area is not as strongly correlated, but is still significantly  correlated  with  nonagricultural  population ( r = 0.78),  GDP ( r = 0.70),  built-up  area  ( r = 0.84), and electricity consumption ( r = 0.77), all significant at a level of over 99.9 percent. The observation that both volume and surface area correlated weakly with the area of the shiqu ( r = 0.43 and 0.49 respectively), which administratively covers both the city and rural districts (see endnote 1), suggests that the light clusters largely reflect the contiguous built area of the city only.

Figure 4 shows graphically the correlations of light volume with nonagricultural population, GDP, built-up area, and electricity consumption. It is clear that the three municipalities of Beijing, Tianjin, and Shanghai had a great influence over the correlation coefficients. When these three municipalities were excluded, the correlation coefficients for volume data were greatly weakened for nonagricultural population ( r = 0.57), GDP ( r = 0.82), builtup  area  ( r = 0.64),  and  electricity  consumption  ( r = 0.39), all significant at a level of over 99.9 percent. The correlation coefficients similarly declined for the surface area data, but less drastic than those for the volume data: r = 0.67  for  nonagricultural  population, r = 0.58  for GDP, r = 0.68 for built-up area, and r = 0.50 for electricity  consumption.  This  suggests  the  occurrence  of  heteroscedascity (Johnston 1980). To minimize the problem, logarithmic transformation was carried out. The correlation coefficients of logarithmic (base 10) transformation of volume with the logarithmic (base 10) transformation of  nonagricultural  population,  GDP,  built-up  area,  and electricity consumption were 0.60, 0.74, 0.65, and 0.54, respectively,  while  those  for  the  logarithmic  (base  10) transformation of surface area with the logarithmic (base 10) transformation of nonagricultural population, GDP, built-up  area,  and  electricity  consumption  were  0.64, 0.53, 0.68, and 0.62, respectively, all significant at over 99.99 percent level. Clearly, the correlation coefficients have become more stabilized, and both the surface area and volume variables are equal as surrogates for the three urban indicators.

## Development of Urban-Indicators Estimation Models

Satellite images have been commonly employed to estimate population. A review of the various approaches used can be found in Lo (1986, 40-70). Most commonly, global-scale satellite images such as the DMSP-OLS data

Figure 4. Linear regression graphs, showing  correlation  between  volume  of  city lights  with  (A)  nonagricultural  population  ( r = 0.91),  (B)  built-up  area  ( r = 0.90), (C) GDP ( r = 0.91), and (D) electricity consumption ( r = 0.86).

<!-- image -->

make use of an allometric growth model (known as Pareto's law in economics) advocated by Tobler (1969), relating population size to land area, which takes the form

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where r is the radius of a circle of the same area of the settlement, P is the population, a 1 is a coefficient, and b 1 is an exponent. Because r represents an area, Equation (1) can also be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where A is the land area, a 2 is a coefficient, and b 2 is an exponent.

In Equation (2), the coefficient a 2 is called the proportionality  coefficient,  a  measure  of  space  standard (Nordbeck 1971), because by rearranging, Equation (2) becomes a 2 = A/P b 2 , which is a ratio between land area and population size and is related to the mean population density of an urban area. In other words, the space standard is the mean reciprocal population density. The exponent b 2 , which is called the scaling factor in biol- ogy, is the most important, because it describes how the land area A in Equation (2) is scaled to the population size P . According to Nordbeck (1971), the relationship in Equation 2 displays the surface-volume constraints, based on the consideration that area has two dimensions while population has three (or a volume). As a result, the value of the exponent b should be 2/3, or 0.67. However, based on his allometric analysis of the U.S. urban  system,  Lee  (1989)  believed  that  population should be treated, not as three-dimensional, but as twodimensional,  and  that  the  value  of  the  exponent b 2 should equal 1. If b 2 = 1, isometry is achieved, implying that A and P in Equation (2) increase in linear proportions  with  respect  to  each  other.  In  other  words,  the population density in the city is always equal to the reciprocal of the proportionality coefficient a , no matter how much the land area ( A )  and  the  population  ( P ) grow. When b 2 &gt; 1, it is known as positive allometry, implying that in Equation (2) A increases at a faster rate than P . When b 2 &lt; 1, negative allometry occurs, implying  that A increases  at  a  slower  rate  than P .  Finally,

when the value of the exponent b 2 equals to zero, P has no effect on A . Clearly, the population density of a city will affect the values of a 2 and b 2 .

In view of our interest in estimating population based on the settlement area as measured from the satellite image, the dependent and independent variables are interchanged, and Equation (2) can be written as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

For  computational purposes,  the  following  logarithmic transformation form is used:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where P is the estimated population, A is the areal extent of the settlement as delineated from the satellite image, a 3 is  a  coefficient,  and b 3 is  an  exponent. Such an approach was successfully applied by Lo and Welch (1977) to estimate the population of cities in China using Landsat  Multispectral Scanner (MSS) images in the 1970s, when population statistics for China were lacking.

The allometric growth model in the form of Equation (3) was employed to estimate nonagricultural (i.e., urban) population (NAGPOP),  GDP,  built-up area (BUA), and electricity consumption (ELECTRIC) from the radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime images of the thirty-five Chinese cities, using surface area and volume  as  the  independent  variables.  The  logarithmic transformation  of  the  allometric  growth  model  in  the form  of  Equation  (4)  minimized  the  problem  of  heteroscedascity in the data mentioned above. Two sets of allometric growth models were developed, one using surface area as the independent variable and the other using volume as the independent variable, for each of the four dependent variables, as follows:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where a 4 , a 5 , . . . a 11 are coefficients and b 4 , b 5 , . . . b 11 are corresponding  exponents  as  defined  by  the  dependent and  independent  variables  in  these  Equations.  These models were developed with reference to seventeen Chinese cities selected from the list in Table 1. These seventeen  cities  included  the  municipality  of  Beijing  and other major provincial cities found throughout China, so that a high degree of diversity was maintained. The remaining eighteen cities were withheld for use in evaluating  the  accuracies  of  the  models  developed.  Table  2 shows the final models.

Because  Chinese  cities  are  much  higher  in  population density than are American cities, living in multistoried buildings is common. It is therefore justified to treat  nonagricultural  population  as  three-dimensional in  China.  Also,  because  allometric  growth  model  in the  form  of  Equation  (3)  is  used  to  estimate  the  various  urban  indicators,  the  dependent  and  independent variables  in  Equation  (2)  have  been  interchanged.  In Equation  (5),  where  surface  area  is  used  to  estimate nonagricultural population, the value of the exponent b 4 should be 3/2, or 1.5, because the independent variable (surface area) is two-dimensional and the dependent variable (nonagricultural population) is three-dimensional, following the logic of the surface-volume constraints discussed before. For Equations (6), (7), and (8), both the dependent and independent variables are two-dimensional, so that the value of the exponent b n is 2/2, or 1. However, the actual values of the exponent b n as extracted from the seventeen cities are all smaller than the expected values of 1.5 or 1 (Table 2), suggesting that negative allometry results, which in turn implies that all the four dependent variables (nonagricultural population, GDP, builtup  area,  and  electricity  consumption)  increase  at  a slower rate than does the independent variable (surface area).

In Equation (9), where light volume is used to estimate  nonagricultural  population,  both  the  dependent and  independent  variables  are  three-dimensional,  so that the expected value of b 8 is 3/3, or 1. As for Equations (10),  (11),  and  (12),  the  dependent  variables  (GDP, built-up area, and electricity consumption) are all twodimensional, while the independent variable (light volume) is three-dimensional, so the expected value of b n is 2/3, or 0.67. The results in Table 2 show that all models except GDP exhibit negative allometry similar to that of models using surface area as independent variable. The value of the exponent b n in the allometric growth model used to estimate GDP (0.73) is larger than 0.67, suggesting positive allometry, which implies that the dependent variable (GDP) increases at a faster rate than the independent variable (volume).

## Evaluation of the Urban-Indicators Estimation Models

The eight models developed based on the seventeen cities were first evaluated statistically. The adjusted coef-

Table 2. Allometric Growth Models Developed to Estimate Various Urban Indicators of the Chinese Cities from Radiance-Calibrated DMSP-OLS Nighttime Images Based on a Sample of Seventeen Cities

| Dependent Variable   |   Coefficient a n |   Exponent b n | Independent Variable   |   r 2 |   Mean ABS RRES |
|----------------------|-------------------|----------------|------------------------|-------|-----------------|
| (1) NAGPOP           |         18.123    |       0.565714 | SURFAREA               |  0.61 |            0.31 |
| (2) GDP              |         17.3926   |       0.598936 | SURFAREA               |  0.39 |            0.53 |
| (3) BUA              |          0.003806 |       0.517656 | SURFAREA               |  0.61 |            0.3  |
| (4) ELECTRIC         |          0.000287 |       0.565735 | SURFAREA               |  0.5  |            0.43 |
| (5) NAGPOP           |          4.1254   |       0.57237  | VOLUME                 |  0.63 |            0.33 |
| (6) GDP              |          0.215865 |       0.731909 | VOLUME                 |  0.58 |            0.44 |
| (7) BUA              |          0.000991 |       0.523337 | VOLUME                 |  0.63 |            0.29 |
| (8) ELECTRIC         |          6.6e-05  |       0.571651 | VOLUME                 |  0.51 |            0.45 |

Notes: a n and b n are, respectively, coefficients a 4 to a 11 and exponents b 4 to b 11 , as defined in Equations (5) to (12). SURFAREA = surface area of the city lightcluster in m 2 . VOLUME = volume of the city light-cluster based on the TIN model (no unit). NAGPOP = nonagricultural population living in shiqu. GDP = gross domestic product in 10,000 yuan. BUA = built-up area ( jianchengqu ) in km 2 . ELECTRIC = electricity consumption in 100-million kilowatt-hours in the shiqu. MEAN ABS RRES = mean absolute relative residuals.

ficient of determination ( r 2 ) gives some idea of the goodness  of  fit  of  the  eight  models  (Table  2).  Clearly,  the model using surface area to estimate GDP showed a poor fit, with an r 2  of only 0.39. However, using volume to estimate GDP produced a much better model, with r 2 = 0.58. The models to estimate nonagricultural population and  built-up  area  showed  acceptable r 2 values  of  over 0.60. The electricity consumption model is the worst fit, probably because of the out-of-date data used. In order to compare the performance of individual models, relative residuals were calculated for each city using the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where RRes Y i is  the relative residual of the dependent variable for city i , Y act is the actual value of the dependent variable,  and Y est is  the  dependent  variable  estimated from the allometric growth model. An absolute RRes Y i was also calculated, so that a mean absolute relative residual was obtained for each model (Table 2). The results confirmed the better performance of those models that estimate  nonagricultural  population  and  built-up  area using either surface area or light volume as independent variable.

The next stage of the evaluation is to apply all eight models  to  the  eighteen  cities  withheld  from  the  list. These cities are equally diverse in size and geographical location. To assess the accuracy of the estimates, the relative  error  and  absolute  relative  error  were  calculated using the formula

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

where RelEr Y i is the relative error in percent of dependent variable Y for city i. Absolute relative error is simply taking the absolute value of RelEr Y i . The results of the evaluation  based  on  the  eighteen  cities  are  shown  in Table 3.

Based on the magnitude of the mean absolute relative errors, models that use surface area and volume as independent variable perform equally, with the exception of the GDP-volume model, for which volume gives a better estimate. There is a tendency for overestimation in all cases. Of the four urban indicators, built-up area is the most accurately estimated, giving a mean absolute relative error of 32.89 percent for the surface area model and 34.27 percent for the volume model, confirming that the light clusters of the DMSP-OLS image indeed record the radiances of the city proper. The estimation of nonagricultural population is most disappointing with a mean absolute relative error of over 50 percent in both cases. However, in examining the relative errors of individual cities, it became obvious that the three cities-Xiamen, Shenzhen,  and  Haikou-designated  as  Special  Economic Zones (SEZ), which are really free-trade zones to attract foreign investment, exhibited the worst overestimates. This is probably because of the unusually extensive built-up area and infrastructure specially created to attract foreign investment, which increase the size of the built-up area more than the growth in size of the urban population. Also, much of the built-up area is for commercial  and  industrial  developments.  As  has  been  observed  earlier,  the  model  displays  negative  isometry, which confirms that the nonagricultural population does indeed increase at a slower rate than surface area or volume,  hence  the  overestimation.  The  SEZ  cities  are therefore 'abnormal.' By dropping these three SEZ cities from the evaluation, the accuracy of all eight models improves greatly (Table 3). The two built-up area models remain superior in accuracy, with a mean absolute relative error of 24.85 percent and 18.75 percent for surface area and volume respectively. However, the greatest improvements  occurred  in  the  estimation  of  nonagricultural  population.  The  nonagricultural  population  was

Table 3. Relative Errors (%) of the Eight Allometric Growth Models (Shown in Table 2) in Estimating Urban Indicators of Eighteen Chinese Cities

|                                                          | Independent Variable: SURFACE AREA   | Independent Variable: SURFACE AREA   | Independent Variable: SURFACE AREA   | Independent Variable: SURFACE AREA   | Independent Variable: VOLUME   | Independent Variable: VOLUME   | Independent Variable: VOLUME   | Independent Variable: VOLUME   |
|----------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| City                                                     | (1) NAGPOP                           | (2) GDP                              | (3) BUA                              | (4) ELECTRIC                         | (1) NAGPOP                     | (2) GDP                        | (3) BUA                        | (4) ELECTRIC                   |
| Tianjin                                                  | 46.64                                | 40.03                                | 40.77                                | 14.02                                | 3.59                           | 27.35                          | 2.33                           | - 19.59                        |
| Shanghai                                                 | - 43.24                              | - 63.37                              | - 7.42                               | - 51.18                              | - 33.11                        | - 40.68                        | 7.48                           | - 42.57                        |
| Shijiazhuang                                             | - 26.47                              | - 32.97                              | - 22.94                              | - 49.16                              | - 13.15                        | - 25.71                        | - 10.24                        | - 39.92                        |
| Taiyuan                                                  | 34.39                                | 81.25                                | 6.48                                 | - 20.69                              | 19.65                          | 70.95                          | - 4.28                         | - 29.42                        |
| Shenyang                                                 | - 28.76                              | - 20.02                              | 4.3                                  | - 10.56                              | - 36.87                        | - 22.19                        | - 6.65                         | - 20.79                        |
| Changchun                                                | - 1.33                               | 18.64                                | 6.09                                 | 41.9                                 | - 1.15                         | 25.48                          | 6.25                           | 42.12                          |
| Hangzhou0.66                                             |                                      | - 47.48                              | 0.29                                 | - 4.83                               | 32.97                          | - 27.78                        | 29.37                          | 25.7                           |
| Hefei                                                    | 20.45                                | 43.32                                | - 23.23                              | 16.83                                | 35.83                          | 55.89                          | - 14.29                        | 31.78                          |
| Xiamen*                                                  | 163.55                               | - 6.88                               | 72.98                                | 162.55                               | 204.51                         | 7.96                           | 97.43                          | 203.37                         |
| Jinan                                                    | 20.4                                 | - 1.67                               | 39                                   | 3.13                                 | 4.71                           | - 12.6                         | 22.31                          | - 10.34                        |
| Zhengzhou31.35                                           | 43.74                                | 27.35                                |                                      | - 10.55                              | 19.39                          | 32.1                           | 16.69                          | - 18.7                         |
| Wuhan                                                    | - 47.52                              | - 44.18                              | - 22.28                              | - 51.8                               | - 43.2                         | - 34.5                         | - 16.47                        | - 47.85                        |
| Shenzhen*                                                | 158.96                               | - 59.13                              | 58.14                                | 87.39                                | 245.58                         | - 37.06                        | 105.84                         | 149.88                         |
| Haikou*                                                  | 85.96                                | 36.24                                | 88.13                                | 316.45                               | 133.18                         | 56.25                          | 132.32                         | 424.58                         |
| Chengdu                                                  | - 34.49                              | - 42.8                               | - 21.16                              | - 17.38                              | - 46.55                        | - 57.18                        | - 34.54                        | - 32.56                        |
| Kunming                                                  | 29.77                                | - 5.65                               | 20.53                                | 31.04                                | 64.41                          | 30.01                          | 49.64                          | 65.96                          |
| Lanzhou29.17                                             | 71.02                                |                                      | - 13.82                              | - 64.09                              | 25.85                          | 70.76                          | - 15.86                        | - 65.02                        |
| Yinchuan                                                 | 166.26                               | 305.38                               | 117.14                               | 138.59                               | 40.59                          | - 43.96                        | - 44.89                        | - 46.64                        |
| Meanrelative error(%)                                    | 33.61                                | 17.53                                | 20.57                                | 29.54                                | 31.95                          | 4.17                           | 17.91                          | 31.67                          |
| Mean absolute relative error (%)                         | 53.81                                | 53.54                                | 32.89                                | 60.67                                | 55.79                          | 37.69                          | 34.27                          | 73.15                          |
| Estimated total                                          | 39,072,848                           | 75,485,214                           | 2,990                                | 619.15                               | 38,035,881                     | 83,090,263                     | 2,920                          | 602.32                         |
| Actual total                                             | 39,212,900                           | 97,108,970                           | 2,705                                | 748.04                               | 39,212,800                     | 97,108,970                     | 2,705                          | 748.04                         |
| %error                                                   | - 0.36                               | - 22.27                              | 10.54                                | - 17.23                              | - 3.00                         | - 14.44                        | 7.95                           | - 19.48                        |
| Excluding the three SEZs (marked by *):                  | 13.15                                | 23.02                                | 10.07                                | - 2.32                               | - 0.55                         | 3.2                            | - 0.88                         | - 13.86                        |
| Mean relative error (%) Mean absolute relative error (%) | 37.39                                | 57.43                                | 24.85                                | 35.05                                | 28.07                          | 38.48                          | 18.75                          | 35.93                          |
| Estimated total                                          | 34,978,668                           | 67,851,280                           | 2,661                                | 554.28                               | 32,861,710                     | 72,778,825                     | 2,513                          | 520.36                         |
| Actual total                                             | 37,525,100                           | 84,038,527                           | 2,509                                | 720.06                               | 37,525,100                     | 84,038,527                     | 2,509                          | 720.06                         |
| %error                                                   | - 6.79                               | - 19.26                              | 6.06                                 | - 23.02                              | - 12.43                        | - 13.4                         | 0.16                           | 27.73                          |

more accurately estimated by using volume rather than surface area as independent variable (with mean absolute relative errors of 37.39 percent and 28.07 percent, respectively). Even the accuracies of the two electricity consumption models have greatly improved, both showing a mean absolute relative error of about 35 percent. As noted above, one main cause of the errors of the electricity consumption model could be the use of out-of-date electricity consumption data in this research.

It is always useful to know the size of the urban population  in  China.  This  can  be  achieved  by  adding  the nonagricultural population of all the cities together. The results are surprisingly accurate. Even without taking out the  three  SEZ  cities,  the  estimation  error  of  the  total nonagricultural population is only -0.36 percent for the surface  area  model  and -3  percent  for  the  volume model. After the three SEZ cities are eliminated, the estimation error is -6.79 percent for the surface area model and -12.43 percent for the volume model. The underestimation in both cases should be noted. The best models are those that estimate the total built-up areas of the cities, with an estimation error of 6.06 percent for the surfacearea model and only 0.16 percent for the volume model.

To conclude, the best urban indicators to be extracted from the DMSP-OLS nighttime image data are built-up area and nonagricultural population. Volume seems to be  a  slightly  better  independent  variable  than  surface area to use to estimate these urban indicators in the form of an allometric growth model.

Finally, it is instructive to examine the relative error of  the  dependent  variable  in  the  allometric  growth model for each city, because it reveals the degree of isom-

etry that has been achieved-in other words, the growth of the city relative to the size of the surface area and volume  displayed  by  the  OLS  image.  If  full  isometry  is achieved, we expect that the relative error of the dependent variable for a city will be close to zero. To return to the original formulation of the allometric growth model of  Equation  (3),  the  nonagricultural-population  and surface-area model is the more appropriate. Of the eighteen cities, only Hangzhou is very close to full isometry (with a relative error of 0.66 percent), followed by Changchun (with a relative error of -1.33 percent) (Table 3). These two cities also showed low relative errors for builtup area in the built-up-area/surface-area model. Cities exhibiting large positive relative errors (i.e., overestimation of nonagricultural population)-such as Xiamen, Shenzhen, and Yinchuan-are the result of negative allometry,  as noted above, suggesting that the nonagricultural population increases at a slower rate than does the surface area. This can also be interpreted to mean that the DMSP-OLS nighttime light clusters  for  these  cities  are  larger  than they  should  be.  This  is  confirmed  by  excessively  large overestimation  of  built-up  areas  of  these  cities  in  the built-up area/surface-area model (Table 3). On the other hand, cities with large negative relative errors (i.e., underestimation of nonagricultural population)-such as Shanghai, Wuhan, and Chengdu-result from positive allometry, suggesting that the nonagricultural population increases at a faster rate than the surface area. Again, one can interpret this to mean that DMSP-OLS nighttime light clusters  are  smaller  than  they  should  be  for  these  cities. This is why these cities all have recorded underestimation of built-up areas in the model using surface area as the independent variable. All these observations suggest that the land use of a city (the ratio of residential to nonresidential use)  has  an  impact  on  the  accuracy  of  nonagricultural population estimation using the allometric growth model.

## City Morphology and Land Use as Revealed by the Light Clusters

Because  the  radiance-calibrated  DMSP-OLS  nighttime  image  can  show  detailed  zonal  variations  of  the lights within the city, some ideas on the internal structure of the city can be obtained. This analysis is further aided by TIN, which creates a three-dimensional model of the city to depict these light zones. Since each pixel of the image represents calibrated radiance, this TIN model is equivalent to the IUA dome. The TIN model can be displayed in 3-D perspective, using the 3D Analyst extension of the ArcView GIS program, so that the shape of the dome can be revealed (Figure 3). Obviously, the shape of the dome is affected by the internal structure of the city. By comparing these 3-D TIN models with the actual maps of the cities in a recent atlas produced by the Chief of Staff Land Survey Department of the People's Republic of China (2000), some insights into the morphology of the city and the associated land use can be inferred, as explained in the following sections:

- Beijing (Figure 3). For the municipality of Beijing, the built-up area is indicated by the DN of over 13 of the DMSP-OLS nighttime image. DNs of 94 and above correlate to Beijing's city core area around the Old Palace, Tiananmen Square, and the surrounding hotels, offices, and shopping districts. Most notable are the numerous linear extensions of the city outward in all directions. The northeastern extension of the city into the Shunyi District and the International  Airport  is  the  most  prominent  and  forms clusters in the DN classes of 13 and 40. Other urban centers in the municipality are also clearly displayed.
- Shenyang (Figure 5). DN classes of 15 and above depict the shape and the built-up area of the city of Shenyang in Liaoning Province, Northeast China. The city core is also identified by the brightest reflectance: DN class 61-69. DNs below 15 display the surrounding market gardening belt, with lower light intensity but still a high number of settlements.
- Xian (Figure 6). This is an ancient Chinese capital of the Tang Dynasty ( ad 618-907) in the west, in the province of Shaanxi. The extent of the city is clearly revealed by DNs over 15. The city core is a walled city depicted by DNs of over 61, where the southern spillover is clearly visible.
- The Zhujiang (Pearl River) Delta (Figure 7). This is a very prosperous region in South China located close to Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region (SAR)  (the  former  British  colony)  and  Macao SAR (the former Portuguese colony). The Shenzhen SEZ is located just to the north of the border of Hong Kong. Together with the city of Guangzhou in the northern tip of the delta, these areas form the so-called Greater Metropolitan Region of South China, as clearly depicted in this DMSP-OLS nighttime image. The delta has been characterized by the occurrence of small towns, which were formerly  rural  settlements.  These  small  towns  have now become cities. All cities labeled on the map can be distinctly identified on the TIN model created from the DMSP-OLS nighttime image by DNs of 28 and above. Hong Kong SAR, which is economically most well developed in the region, is also the brightest in the region, with the top two classes

of DNs, 96-124 located in Kowloon Peninsulaan  area  of  high  population  density  and  intense commercial  activities.  Surprisingly,  the  northern coastal strip of Hong Kong Island, where important commercial activities also occur, was not picked up by the DMSP-OLS nighttime image, probably because of the narrowness of the strip and the mountainous relief.

The above analysis clearly indicates the usefulness of the DMSP-OLS nighttime image in revealing the mor- phology of a city based on the three-dimensional TIN model (Lo 1980). However, the land-use/cover information  is  a  little  bit  limited,  although  one  can  infer  the cropland area and the vegetable belt, and hence the rural settlement area, based on the somewhat weaker reflectance. This explains the cause of the inaccuracy in estimating nonagricultural population using the allometric growth  model  discussed  previously.  The  light  clusters show the built-up areas without differentiating their use as residential or nonresidential.

Finally, it is interesting to note that, on the whole, large cities are much brighter than smaller cities in the radiance-calibrated OLS nighttime image. For example,

Figure 5. Three-dimensional TIN model of radiance of Shenyang. A perspective view of the TIN model is also shown. The land-use/ cover map of Shenyang is also shown for comparison. The approximate extent of this map is marked on the TIN map.

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Three-dimensional TIN model of radiance of Xian. A perspective view is also shown. This can be compared with a city map of Xian showing the built-up area, the approximate extent of which is marked in the TIN map.

Figure 7. TIN model of radiance of the Zhujiang Delta region, as compared with a map of the delta (at the same scale), showing all the cities and towns that can be detected by the DMSP-OLS image. Radiance  contours  at  an  interval  of  10  DN  units  were  added  to highlight the towns and cities.

<!-- image -->

the municipality of Shanghai is the brightest of all, with a maximum DN of 149, followed by Hong Kong in the Zhujiang Delta region, with a maximum DN of 124. The municipalities  of  Beijing  and  Tianjin  displayed  maximum DNs of 121 and 102, respectively. Another interesting observation is that cities in West China are generally not as bright. Even large cities such as Chongqing and  Chengdu  (both  in  Sichuan  Province),  Yinchuan, and Xining showed low maximum DNs (26, 26, 28, and 32, respectively). This observation implied that western cities tended to use less light at night than cities in the east and south of China. In comparing the GDP of these cities, it is clear that there is some relationship between economic development and brightness, as observed by the research of Elvidge and colleagues (1997c) at the global scale. Such a relationship also seems to follow the allometric growth law.

## Detection of Urban Concentrations and Extended Metropolitan Regions

One  of  the  most  important  characteristics  of  the DMSP-OLS nighttime image of China (Figure 1) is its ability  to  show  urban  concentrations  (built-up  areas) and the phenomenon known as the extended metropolitan region (Ginsburg, Koppel, and McGee 1991) or the desakota region (in McGee's [1991] terminology). This region is defined as one adjacent to a city characterized by high population density, great mobility of people and goods, intensified rural-urban interactions, and the emergence of transportation corridors. Both industrial and agricultural  activities  occur  here.  Many  small  towns  also spring up in this region, thus explaining the rather high level of light intensity. The Zhujiang Delta is a classic example of such a form of urban development (Lin 1997). The DMSP-OLS nighttime image displays all the major cities in the delta, as well as the extended metropolitan region indicated by DN class 13.9-27.6 (Figure 7).

Such development of extended metropolitan regions can also be found in other parts of China. The most notable are the areas around Beijing and Tianjin, and between Tianjin, Tanggu and Nanjiao (compare Figure 1 and Figure 8). There is also a northeast-southwest-trending linear cluster from Taiyuan to Xiaoyi in Shanxi Province,  following  a  branch  of  the  Huang  He  (Yellow River). To the east of this is another north-south-trending cluster from Shijiachuang (Hebei) via Handan (Henan) to  Anyang (Henan). Shandong Province also shows a high concentration of cities. The best examples are Jinan and  Qingzhou.  The  area  surrounding  Qingdao  on  the coast also clearly shows the extended metropolitan region towards the north and the east. Shanghai and its environs  show  the  largest  number  of  clusters  of  cities with  extended  metropolitan  region  development.  The most notable and continuous extended metropolitan region  is  westward  from  Shanghai  to  Kunshan,  Suzhou, Wuxi, and Changzhou, all following an express highway in Jiangsu Province. In Northeast China, a prominent urban development is the clusters of cities in Liaoning Province  following  the  Dalian-Shenyang  expressway, linking  up  such  important  industrial  cities  as  Fushun, Shenyang,  Benxi,  Liaoyang,  Anshan,  Haicheng,  and Yingkou. In South China, pockets of coastal development of cities are seen. The most notable ones occur in the  province  of  Fujian  with  two  major  clusters,  (1) Fuzhou  and  (2)  Quanzhou-Shishi-Xiamen-Zhangzhou (the most extensive). Another cluster is in the Zhujiang Delta  in  Guangdong  Province.  Finally,  in  Northwest China, urban development is not strong, as revealed by the small size and number of light clusters, most of which

Figure 8. Major urban clusters with extended metropolitan regions detected by radiance-calibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime image (1) BeijingTianjin, (2) Taiyuan-Xiaoyi, (3) Shijiachuang-Anyang, (4) Jinan-Zibo, (5) Qingdao, (6) Shanghai-Changzhou, (7) Yingkou-Shenyang, (8) Quanzhou-Zhangshou, (9) Zhujiang Delta, and (10) Wulumuqi (compare with Figure 1).

<!-- image -->

are found around the city of Wulumuqi (Urumqi) in Xinjiang Autonomous Region (Figure 8).

## Conclusions

This article has evaluated the usefulness of the radiancecalibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime image as a source of urban information on China. The main focus has been on individual cities revealed as light clusters in the image. Using image processing and GIS software, it is possible to map the zonal variations of the radiance-calibrated lights of the city, based on which a three-dimensional model of the  city  can  be  created  using  TIN  functionality.  This three-dimensional  model  can  be  conceptualized  as  an IUA dome showing the shape of light energy over the city at night. This dome provides two variables, surface area and volume, which were employed to extract the following indicators for the city: nonagricultural popula- tion, GDP, built-up area, and electricity consumption. The allometric growth model was used for this purpose. The logartithmic transformation of the allometric growth model helps minimize the problem of heteroscedascity in the data.

A  total  of  thirty-five  Chinese  cities  with  groundtruth  data  were  used  for  the  evaluation.  It  was  found that both surface area and volume can be used as independent variables in the form of an allometric growth model  to  more  accurately  estimate  built-up  area  and nonagricultural  population.  Estimation  of  GDP  was better with the use of volume as independent variable in the model. Electricity consumption was not as accurately  estimated  as  expected,  probably  because  of  the use  of  out-of-date  ground-truth  data.  It  was  found that  certain  cities,  such  as  those  designated  as  SEZs, tended  to  give  overestimated  nonagricultural  population, probably because they have developed more infrastructure  and  nonresidential  built-up  land  than  have

other 'normal' cities. An examination of the relative errors of the estimates sheds lights on the degree of isometry achieved by the allometric growth models, which in turn gives insights on the rate of growth of a city (relative to the size of the light cluster). It is particularly noteworthy  that  the  sum  totals  of  nonagricultural  population, built-up area, and GDP for China can be quite accurately estimated. Volume is slightly more accurate than surface area in estimating built-up area of the city.

The shape of the IUA dome as constructed by TIN displays the three-dimensional distribution of light energy, and is certainly affected by the internal structure of the city. Thus, some ideas of urban morphology and land use can be inferred. Invariably, the city core shows the highest light reflectance in all the Chinese cities examined. The implication is that the highest building density is found at the city core.

In combination with the TIN models of cities, the radiance-calibrated  DMSP-OLS  nighttime  image  also facilitates the delineation of the extended metropolitan region surrounding a city or town, a common phenomenon of interest to urban geographers of China. The light intensity displays the levels of economic activity in the region, which is characterized by a mix of rural and urban pursuits. The OLS image displays the increasingly important role played by the express highways (transportation corridors) in promoting urban development with the coalescing of adjacent cities into a megalopolis (or the formation of conurbations). Such a phenomenon is particularly noticeable in the Beijing-Tianjin area, Shanghai, Shenyang-Dalian area, and the Zhujiang Delta region.

In conclusion, the DMSP-OLS nighttime images in the radiance-calibrated form provide useful demographic and socioeconomic characteristics of cities in a country as vast and diverse as China, based on the application of allometric growth models. Despite the low spatial resolution (resampled from 2.7 km to 1 km), the morphology of individual  cities  can  still  be  detected  and  a  limited amount of land-use information can be inferred, with the aid  of  TIN  modeling.  An  important  advantage  of  the DMSP-OLS images is the global coverage, which allows their application at continental, regional, national, and even local scales. They have already been used in the LandScan Global Population Projection to help the interpolation  of  population  (Dobson  et  al.  2000).  For countries  without  good  census  statistics,  the  radiancecalibrated DMSP-OLS nighttime images will be particularly useful in providing an up-to-date view of urban population distribution. Further refinements of the modeling  approach  are  needed  if  higher  accuracy  is  to  be achieved for the demographic and socioeconomic indicators extracted from these images.

## Acknowledgments

The author wishes to thank Dr. Kevin Gallo of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for supplying the DMSP-OLS nighttime image of China for this analysis. Research assistance given by Dr. Kai Wang is  also  gratefully  acknowledged.  Professor  Kam  Wing Chan of the  Department  of  Geography,  University  of Washington,  kindly  provided  urban  statistics  on  the Chinese cities. Finally, the author acknowledges the very useful  comments  of  three  anonymous  reviewers  of  an early draft of this article, which improved the article in its final form.

## Notes

1. Nonagricultural population ( feinongye renkou ) of the urban district ( shiqu ) refers to population living in the city district and rural district only (exclusive of the counties administered by  the  city).  The  size  of  this  nonagricultural  population should  be  smaller  than  that  of  the  administrative  district ( diqu ), as noted below.
2. The built-up area (jianchengqu) is much smaller than the areas of the administrative district (diqu) and urban district (shiqu), and constitutes the city proper.
3. Residents in China are classified into two major categories based on the localities in which they live, or the 'household ( hukou )  registration':  agricultural  and  nonagricultural.  As the terms imply, agricultural population ( nongye renkou ) refers  to  rural  population,  while  nonagricultural  population ( feinongye  renkou )  is  urban.  In  reality,  the  classification  is not very clear-cut (see Chan and Xu [1985] and Chan and Li [1999] for detailed explanations). As used in the Urban Statistical Yearbook of China 1997 (State Statistical Bureau 1998), the nonagricultural population of the diqu is the population living in the urban district, the rural district, and the counties administered by the city.

## References

- Brandli, H. W. 1978. The night eye in the sky. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 44:503-05.
- Chan, K. W., and Z. Li. 1999. The hukou system and rural-urban migration  in  China:  Processes  and  changes. The  China Quarterly 160:818-55.
- Chan, K. W., and X. Xu. 1985. Urban population growth and urbanization in China since 1949: Reconstructing a baseline. The China Quarterly 104:583-613.
- Chief of Staff Land Survey Department 2000. Zhonghua renmingongheguo dituji (Atlas of the People's Republic of China). Beijing: Planets Cartographic Publishing House.
- Consortium for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN). 2001. http://www.ciesin.org (last accessed 1 February 2002).
- Croft, T. A. 1978. Nighttime images of the earth from space. Scientific American 239:86-98.

Dobson, J. E., E. A. Bright, P. R. Coleman, R. C. Durfee, and

- B. A. Worley. 2000. LandScan: A global population database  for  estimating  populations  at  risk. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 66:849-57.
2. Doll, C. N. H., J.-P. Muller, and C. D. Elvidge. 2000. Nighttime imagery as a tool for global mapping of socioeconomic parameters and greenhouse gas emissions. Ambio 29:15762.
3. Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, J. B. Dietz, T. Bland, P. C. Sutton, and H. W. Kroehl. 1999. Radiance calibration of DMSPOLS low-light imaging data of human settlements. Remote Sensing of Environment 68:77-88.
4. Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, V. R. Hobson, E. A. Kihn, H. W. Kroehl, E. R. Davis, and D. Cocero. 1997a. Satellite inventory of human settlements using nocturnal radiation emissions:  A  contribution  for  the  global  tool  chest. Global Change Biology 3:387-95.
5. Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, E. A. Kihn, H. W. Kroehl, and E. R. Davis. 1997b. Mapping city lights with nighttime data from the DMSP Operational Linescan System. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 63:727-34.
6. Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, E. A. Kihn, H. W. Kroehl, E. R. Davis, and C. W. Davis. 1997c. Relation between satelliteobserved visible-near infrared emissions, population, economic activity, and electric power consumption. International Journal of Remote Sensing 18:1373-79.
7. Ginsburg, N., B. Koppel, and T. G. McGee. 1991 . Extended metropolis: settlement transition in Asia. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
8. Imhoff, M. L., W. T. Lawrence, C. D. Elvidge, T. Paul, E. Levine, M. V. Privalsky, and V. Brown. 1997a. Using nighttime DMSP/OLS images of city lights to estimate the impact  of  urban  land  use  on  soil  resources  in  the  United States. Remote Sensing of Environment 59:105-17.
9. Imhoff, M. L., W. T. Lawrence, D. C. Stutzer, and C. D. Elvidge. 1997b. A technique for using composite DMSP/OLS 'city lights' satellite data to map urban area. Remote Sensing of Environment 61:361-70.
10. Johnston, R. J. 1980. Multivariate statistical analysis in geography. New York: Longman.
11. Lee, Y. 1989. An allometric analysis of the U.S. urban system: 1960-80. Environment and Planning A 21:463-76.
12. Lin, G. C. S. 1997. Red capitalism in South China: Growth and development of the Pearl River Delta. Vancouver: UBC Press.
13. Lo, C. P. 1980. Shaping socialist Chinese cities-A model of form and land use. In China: Urbanization and national development , ed. C. K. Leung and N. Ginsburg, 130-55. Chicago: Department of Geography, The University of Chicago.
14. ---. 1986. Applied remote sensing. New York: Longman Scientific and Technical.
15. Lo, C. P., and R. Welch. 1977. Chinese urban population estimates. Annals  of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers 67:246-53.
16. Ma, L. J. C. 1996. The spatial patterns of interprovincial ruralto-urban  migration  in  China,  1982-1987. Chinese  Environment and Development 7:73-102.
17. McGee, T. G. 1991. The emergence of desakota regions in Asia: Expanding a hypothesis. In Extended metropolis: Settlement transition  in  Asia ,  ed.  N.  Ginsburg,  B.  Koppel,  and  T.  G. McGee, 3-25. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
18. Nordbeck, S. 1971. Urban allometric growth. Geografiska Annaler 53B:54-67.
19. Shen, R., 2000. China's economic reform: An experiment in pragmatic socialism. Westport, CT: Praeger.
20. State Statistical Bureau. 1998. Zhongguo chengshi tongji nianjian 1997 (Urban statistical yearbook of China 1997). Beijing: China Statistical Publishing House.
21. Steinwand, D.R. 1993. Mapping raster imagery into the interrupted Goode Homolosine Projection. International Journal of Remote Sensing 15:3463-72.
22. Sutton, P., D. Roberts, C. Elvidge, and H. Meij. 1997. A comparison of nighttime satellite imagery and population density for the continental United States. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 63:1303-13.
23. Tobler, W. R. 1969. Satellite confirmation of settlement size coefficients. Area 1:30-34.
24. Welch, R., and S. Zupko. 1980. Urbanized area energy utilization patterns from DMSP data. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing 46:201-7.

Correspondence: Department of Geography, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602; e-mail: chpanglo@uga.edu.