This article was downloaded by: [RMIT University]

On: 19 August 2015, At: 08:26

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered

office: 5 Howick Place, London, SW1P 1WG

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

To cite this article: Martha G. Bell (2015): Historical Political Ecology of Water: Access to Municipal Drinking Water in Colonial Lima, Peru (1578-1700), The Professional Geographer, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2015.1062700

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2015.1062700

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp;

## The Professional Geographer

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Historical Political Ecology of Water: Access to Municipal Drinking Water in Colonial Lima, Peru (1578-1700)

Martha G. Bell a

a Leiden Institute for Area Studies

Published online: 14 Aug 2015.

Conditions of access and use can be found at http://www.tandfonline.com/page/termsand-conditions

## Historical Political Ecology of Water: Access to Municipal Drinking Water in Colonial Lima, Peru (1578-1700)

Martha G. Bell

Leiden Institute for Area Studies

Historical political ecology provides a powerful framework for understanding nature -society relations in the past. This approach is applied to municipal drinking water governance in early colonial Lima, Peru, with a focus on how power dynamics in fl uenced sociospatial patterns of water access and control. Sixteenth- and seventeenth-century archival sources are analyzed for material aspects of Lima ' s drinking water pipeline network and for the management strategies employed by the municipal government. Access to water is demonstrated to have shaped, reinforced, and re fl ected colonial social divisions and to have been linked to the spatial development of the city, including urban -rural relations. Key Words: colonialism, historical political ecology, Peru, water governance, water infrastructure.

历史 政 治 生 态 学 ， 为 理 解 过 往 的 自 然 -社 会 关 係 ， 提 供 了 强 而 有 力 的 架构 。 本 文 将 此 方 法 应 用 至 秘 鲁 在 利 马 殖 民 时 期 早 期 的 市 政 饮 用 水 管 理 ， 并 聚 焦 权 力动 态 如 何 影 响 获 取 以 及 控 制 水 资 源 的 社 会 空 间 模 式 。 本 文 分 析 十 六 世 纪 和 十 七世 纪 的 档案 资 源 ， 以 探 究 利 马 的 饮 用 水 管 网 路 的 物 质 层 面 ， 以 及 市 政 府 所 运 用 的 管 理 策 略 。 水 资 源 的 获 取 ， 已 被 証 实 形 塑 、 强 化 并 反 映 了 殖 民 社 会 的 分 化 ， 并 与 城 市 的 空 间 发 展 相 互 连 结 ， 包 含 城 市 -乡 村 关 係 。 关 键 词 : 殖 民 主义 ， 历史 政 治 生 态 学 ， 秘 鲁 ， 水 资 源 管 理 ， 水 资 源 基 础 建 设 。

La ecología política hist  orica nos proporciona una potente armaz  on para comprender mejor las relaciones naturaleza-sociedad del pasado. Se aplic  o este enfoque al estudio de la administraci  on municipal del agua potable en Lima, Per  u, a principios de la colonia, con inter  es concentrado en la manera como las din  amicas del poder in fl uyeron sobre los patrones socioespaciales del acceso y control del agua. Las fuentes de archivos de los siglos XVI y XVII son analizados en lo que concierne a los aspectos materiales de la red del acueducto de agua potable de Lima, lo mismo que en lo relacionado con las estrategias de manejo utilizadas por el gobierno municipal. Se demuestra que el acceso al agua con fi gur  o, reforz  o y re fl ej  o las divisiones sociales coloniales, y que todo eso estuvo conectado con el desarrollo espacial de la ciudad, incluso las relaciones urbano-rurales. Palabras clave: colonialismo, ecología política hist  orica, Per  u, administraci  on del agua, infraestructura del agua.

The public utility in the fair distribution of waters . . . has excited in all times continuing controversies.

-Ambrosio Cerd  an de Landa, Lima Water Judge (1828, 3 -4)

H istorical perspectives have long been considered integral to political ecology (Zimmerer and Bassett 2003; Peet and Watts 2004; Robbins 2004), although how and to what end historical content and analysis could be incorporated into this research approach has not been fully resolved and remains an ambiguous pursuit (Offen 2004). In general, the historical political ecology approach calls for the application of historical perspectives within a broadly de fi ned political ecology point of view and has been de fi ned as ' a fi eld-informed interpretation of society -nature relations in the past ' (Offen 2004, 21). This includes using historical material to contextualize current environmental con fl icts, especially the continuing in fl uences of European expansion and colonialism, often with the explicit motivation of improving social justice or environmental conservation in the present (Brannstrom 2004; Offen 2004; D. K. Davis 2009). Historical political ecology might also include asking questions about environmental change or natural resource use in historical periods, either recent (e.g., Swyngedouw 1999; Biehler 2009; Carey 2010; Lane 2011; Carey, French, and O ' Brien 2012) or more distant (e.g., Watts 1983; Sluyter 1999; Zimmerer 2000; Carney 2001; M. Davis 2004; End fi eld and Fern  andez Tejedo 2006; D. K. Davis 2007; End fi eld 2008). Although this latter purpose -using a political ecological analysis to closely examine nature -society relations in the past and not just provide context for current-day issues -is lesser used, it represents a powerful framework for historical research.

In this article, I apply such a framework to municipal drinking water access and governance in colonial Lima, the capital city of the Viceroyalty of Peru. I draw on approaches and questions inspired by political ecology to examine patterns and politics of water use in a colonial context, focusing on the in fl uence of power dynamics on sociospatial patterns of resource access and control (following McCarthy 2002; Ribot and Peluso 2003; Turner 2009). Using material analysis of water infrastructure and technology recorded in sixteenth- and seventeenth-century archives, I explain how water access formed, reinforced, and re fl ected

colonial social divisions, as well as in fl uenced the spatial development of the colonial city.

The city of Lima, originally called Ciudad de Los Reyes , was founded in 1535 as the seat of the Spanish Viceroyalty of Peru. It can be considered one of the most prominent of the Spanish colonial cities, second perhaps only to Mexico, the capital of New Spain. Lima is located on the central coast of Peru in a desert climate where true rainfall rarely occurs. All water used for drinking, irrigation, sanitation, and industry must be drawn from river watersheds and related aquifers. The urban design of Lima followed the wellknown Spanish colonial grid pattern, and the city was speci fi cally sited along the banks of the Rímac River and in relation to the numerous pre-Hispanic irrigation canals drawn from this river. 1 The Spaniards, however, established their own drinking water pipeline infrastructure. This underground pipe network, fi rst inaugurated in 1578, was controlled by the Cabildo (City Council) and was one of the earliest in the New World. The Cabildo, or municipal branch of colonial government, was of fi cially charged with managing Lima ' s water and, not surprisingly, the careful division of measured amounts of drinking and irrigation water occupied much of its energy. 2 Although the Cabildo ' s explicitly stated objective was to provide access to clean and copious drinking water for the entire urban population, this goal was only partially achieved. Therefore, this article seeks to examine how municipal governance strategies contributed to inequality in access to drinking water among colonial Lima ' s urban residents. The methodological approach to answering this question incorporates two major components: fi rst, asking questions inspired by political ecology and, in particular, the political ecology of water and, second, applying data collection and analysis techniques appropriate to the historical period being studied.

Three key themes drawn from the recent literature on the political ecology of water inform my interpretations of the Lima case. Most important, unequal water access (Swyngedouw 2004; Bakker 2011; Loftus 2011) and the related politics of surface water or aquifer management (Swyngedouw 1999; Norman and Bakker 2008; Brooks and Linton 2011; Jepson 2012) have proven integral themes in understanding current-day water systems and have been shown to have both important historical antecedents and long-term legacy effects. Second, analyses of urban development and urban -rural relations related to water demonstrate strong urban bias, with urban uses often privileged in cases of con fl icting multiple uses of water (multifunctionality). This bias, or unequal relationship between urban and rural areas, is evidenced by the urban hydraulic reach (or water footprint; Swyngedouw 1997, 2004; Bakker 2003; Kaika 2005; Scott and Pablos 2011). Third, combining spatial, social, political, and economic aspects of the previously mentioned themes, Bakker (2003) indicated that water supply in urban areas, especially urbanizing areas of the Global South, should be understood in terms of archipelagos instead of networks, given the discontinuous and partial coverage of public water supply and the frequency of multiple and overlapping methods of public and private water delivery mechanisms. Together, these themes provide a foundational perspective from which to examine urbanization, water supply, and inequality. They suggest the primacy of urban water use and indicate unequal infrastructural coverage and access to water within urban spaces.

Although these topics, questions, and themes from political ecological research can be easily transferred to historical contexts, the research methods typically used by political ecologists might not always be applicable, especially when more distant historical periods are studied. For such older cases, it is necessary to combine multiple methods and data sources, which might include fi eld-based ethnographic and landscape observations, archival analysis, archaeological investigation, biophysical data, mapping, and more. The multidisciplinary research area called hydraulic archaeology provides a framework for analysis of (pre) historical water systems (Kirchner and Navarro 1996; Glick and Kirchner 2000; Barcel  o 2004; Glick 2005). Here, practitioners seek to reconstruct the design, layout, construction, and modi fi cation of hydraulic systems, to identify the social groups participating in the use of these systems and thus to determine the relative political and demographic strengths of these groups as demonstrated by their ability to access water resources. The major unit of investigation in hydraulic archaeology is the concept of hydraulic space (Barcel  o 1996), which is basically equivalent to what Swyngedouw (1999) termed the ' waterscape ' and can be de fi ned as a landscape of water use, at once both natural and social. It is a space designed to take advantage of a natural fl uvial system, and incorporates (1) the aquifer or drainage area, (2) the local and regional topography in relation to desired water conduction, and (3) the irrigated parcels or other uses of water. It includes the biophysical context controlling the quantity of water available and the direction of its fl ow, as well as the human division of water among houses, fi elds, orchards, and other uses. The orientation and design of a hydraulic space is based on features of the fl uvial system, but the conduction and distribution of water in canals and pipes follows patterns that are neither natural nor casual. This water infrastructure is closely linked to the organization of productive activities and therefore to social, political, and economic relationships.

The focus on infrastructure (e.g., canals, pipelines), achieved through consideration of a range of data sources (e.g., archaeological survey and excavation, historical documents and maps, legal traditions, toponyms, and remotely sensed imagery), makes hydraulic archaeology a useful guide for pursuing historical political ecology work on water in colonial Lima. Given the nearly 500 years of Lima ' s urban development, few material or archaeological remains of colonial water infrastructure can still be found (or

reasonably accessed), so in this case archival sources contain the best information. The major source for the analysis of Lima ' s hydraulic space is the Libros de Cabildos de Lima (the books of the City Council of Lima, hereafter LCL ). These books, which record the minutes from the weekly or biweekly meetings of Lima ' s Cabildo, span almost the entire colonial period, from the city ' s foundation in 1535 to after Peru ' s independence in 1821, 3 and provide an incredibly comprehensive and continuous record of the Cabildo ' s actions related to drinking water governance. 4 In this article I examine the period 1578 to 1700, which was the interval during which most of Lima ' s public and private drinking water infrastructure was installed, the vast majority of potable water connection licenses were issued, and the most signi fi cant water management and governance strategies were developed. Speci fi cally, I analyze all references to springs, reservoirs, pipes, tanks, fountains, petitions for water connections, and other related topics in the LCL of the period in question to determine both spatial and temporal aspects of water supply in the pipeline network. I consider such basic questions as these: Where were pipelines constructed and when? Which residents and populations did these pipelines serve? How reliable was water supply in the network overall? This included mapping the pipeline routes and the locations of public and private running water connections. 5 I used this analysis of written descriptions of material aspects of Lima ' s hydraulic space to interpret the biophysical, social, political, and economic signi fi cance of patterns of drinking water access and control in the early colonial period and to evaluate the Cabildo ' s role in contributing to or alleviating inequality in water access.

## Lima's Hydraulic Space and Its Governance

In 1671, Lima ' s solicitor general called water ' the element most necessary after air ' ( LCL 29.X.1671), 6 and indeed it was the natural resource most frequently discussed by Lima ' s Cabildo. The provision of drinking water was considered one of the principal responsibilities of the Cabildo: ' the fi rst thing given attention in the foundation of all of the cities of the world [is] that this element, inexcusable for human life, is provided with cleanliness and security ' ( LCL 17.XI.1649). To this end, the Spanish located their capital city along the banks of the Rímac River, to provide residents with water for irrigation, drinking, sanitation, and industry. The Rímac dominates Lima ' s hydraulic space (Figure 1). Like all of Peru ' s coastal rivers, it fl ows westward, cutting down from the glacial lakes of the high Andes to the Paci fi c, descending from a height of over 5,500 m above sea level to its mouth near Lima ' s port El Callao over a distance of about 130 km. Its fl ow varies seasonally, increasing during the highland rainy season (October -April), when it often threatens to overrun its banks, and all but drying up during the dry months (May -September). The Rímac was the source of the irrigation canals that supported all agriculture in the region around the city (Domínguez 1988). It was also the source of numerous springs used for drinking water during the colonial period. Seepage and fi ltration from the river and the Andean cordillera fi lls the large alluvial aquifer -of approximately 390 km 2 in area and 100 to 500 m in depth -located underneath the city and its surroundings, recharging this resource on a seasonal basis (Lerner et al. 1982; Quintana and Tovar 2002).

The Spanish designed and built their linked agricultural and hydraulic system ( fi elds, canals, reservoirs, and pipelines) around the natural topography as well as the pre-Hispanic canals already in existence. This multipurpose hydraulic space linked Lima ' s urban core with its rural surroundings and was of fi cially controlled by the Cabildo, which exercised jurisdiction over the urban zone (approximately 2.6 km 2 ), as well as the surroundings of the city (approximately a 113km radius around the city). A diverse population resided within this larger territory, primarily made up of Spaniards, Africans, and Indians. 7 Although the Cabildo claimed great authority over the city, it actually governed through a complicated relationship with other branches of colonial government, especially the Viceroy (the Spanish monarch ' s representative in Peru) and the Real Audiencia (Royal Audience, the highest court in Peru). With respect to water administration, responsibilities of the Cabildo included protection of the urban riverbank and construction of levees, distribution of rights to irrigation waters, canal maintenance, concession of milling licenses, and, of primary importance here, construction and maintenance of a municipal drinking water pipeline network and allocation of permits to install private connections to this network for homes and other institutions. To manage all aspects of municipal water governance, a water judge ( Juez de Aguas ) was elected annually from among the city councilmen ( Regidores ). The water judge post was established in 1556, with power to enforce the water ordinances for the city and surrounding countryside. It was a lucrative position, with a salary of 800 pesos a year, yet election as water judge rotated among the councilmen and did not seem to require much specialized knowledge (Bell forthcoming).

To provision the city with drinking water, Lima ' s Cabildo carried out three functions: (1) It secured the source of the water in springs on the outskirts of the city; (2) it installed and maintained a network of reservoirs, tanks, and pipelines; and (3) it awarded licenses for running water connections from the pipes to private houses, monasteries and convents, and other institutions. For this, beginning in 1611, each year the Cabildo named three or four pipeline commissioners ( Comisarios de Ca ~ nerías ). 8 These pipeline commissioners were councilmen or mayors, and in fi fty-eight of the seventy-nine years for which we have data in the seventeenth century, one of the commissioners was simultaneously the water judge (or

4

Figure 1 The hydraulic space of colonial Lima and its rural surroundings, including the main irrigation canals drawn from the R  ımac River, such as the Huatica and the Surco canals, as well as important springs and original municipal pipeline routes. Source: Redrawn from Dom  ınguez (1988), with information from Bromley and Barbagelata (1945) and 'Plan[o] Topogr  afico' (1787). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

had held the post previously). 9 By the end of the seventeenth century it was common practice to name the two mayors and the water judge as the commissioners (from 1687), signifying that these commissioners were selected from the most powerful members of the Cabildo and also that although the fi gure of the water judge appears absent from most of the records of pipeline administration, he was in fact present in his role as pipeline commissioner. The pipeline commissioners ' work centered on evaluating petitions for private water connections through site visits and engineer ' s reports, determining how much water should be awarded and from which pipeline, and setting the price and conditions of each license or concession. Commissioners also attempted to ensure that no one took more water than their title allowed and coordinated the construction and maintenance of the pipe network in general. In this case some specialized knowledge was developed; for example, Councilman Ordo ~ no de Samudio was selected thirty times as pipeline commissioner between 1650 and 1683 and was considered an expert on the topic.

The engineer ( alarife ) in charge of the pipelines was another important person and one who gained in fl uence over the course of the seventeenth century. In 1609 the Cabildo determined that the municipal pipelines and public fountains should be maintained by a specialist ( LCL 14.XII.1609), and from 1625 the post was always held by one of the of fi cial city engineers (see also San Crist  obal 1993). 10 In reality, only three engineers managed the pipelines for the majority of the century: Clemente de Mansilla (1625 -1634), Juan de Mansilla (1635 -1661), and Pedro Fern  andez de Vald  es (1661 -1706). 11 The inheritance and concentration of knowledge about the urban drinking water system in these men was extraordinary, and their opinions were commonly heard (and heeded) during Cabildo meetings. Finally, it is necessary to mention that the engineers worked with African slaves, for whom little documentary evidence exists. In only one Cabildo meeting from the period in question was one of these men mentioned by name: Pedro Angola, who was Juan de Mansilla ' s slave ( LCL .18.IV.1654). 12 Apparently this was a position requiring skill, but also entailing damp and dif fi cult conditions.

## Lima's Drinking Water Pipelines and the Establishment of Neighborhoods 'Above' and 'Below'

The pipeline network began at the springs located on the outskirts of the city (Figure 2). In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Lima drank mainly from two springs located approximately 6 km from the Plaza Mayor, called locally Atarjea and Sabana

<!-- image -->

Figure 2 Connections of the two major springs Atarjea and Sabana with the municipal pipeline network and the important reservoirs and water tanks. The springs are located at an elevation of approximately 250 m above sea level and 100 m above the main plaza. Source: Bromley and Barbagelta (1945), 'Plan[o] Topogr  afico' (1787), GoogleMaps. (Color figure available online.)

(Bromley and Barbagelata 1945, 41; Raimondi [1824] 2009, 257 -58). The location of both springs, topographically above the city by approximately 100 m, provided the necessary inclination to canalize the water toward the main water tank located in the urban core, called the Caridad water tank ( Caja de Agua de la Caridad ) for its location next to the Caridad Hospital ( Hospital de la Caridad ). Water was distributed from this central storage point into the public and private pipelines. From the outset, this infrastructure contributed to inequality in water access. The pipeline network ' s center of gravity was the Caridad water tank in the northeast section of the city center. Those who lived above this key point in the network, including the farmers in the rural area around the springs, had to cede their rights to the zones lower in the fl ow of water. 13

The momentous inauguration of the fi rst public fountain in Lima ' s Plaza Mayor in 1578 was part of a larger municipal project to bring piped drinking water to city residents. 14 This project, in planning since 1552, culminated in the three main municipal pipelines that were constructed by 1613 (Bromley and Barbagelata 1945; see also LCL 26.XI.1610). The pipes were ceramic, made by city potters, and buried below city streets ( LCL 14.IX.1660; see also San Crist  obal 2005, 185 -86). The water for all three fl owed from the Caridad water tank (routes and construction dates summarized in Table 1 and illustrated in Figure 3). The Cabildo received petitions for private connections of running water from these three main municipal pipelines, to be installed in homes, monasteries and convents, and institutions (like hospitals). These connections were for speci fi c amounts of water withdrawn from the main pipelines, called pajas or reales , which were units of measurement based on the fl ow of water through pipes of controlled circumference (Table 2). The majority of petitions were submitted during the twenty-year period in which the three pipelines were being constructed (summarized in Table 3).

A total of sixty-three petitions for drinking water connections were recorded in the LCL from 1578 to 1700 for Municipal Pipelines 1 to 3, and a total of eighty connections could be identi fi ed for these three pipelines using additional data from Bromley and Barbagelata (1945). 15 Information about these petitions and the eventual concession of titles is listed in Tables 4 through 6, including biographical and institutional information about the petitioners and the locations of these concessions are mapped in Figures 3 and 4. Several signi fi cant patterns can be observed. Spatially, below the Caridad water tank the three original municipal pipelines were distributed fairly evenly over the central section of Lima ' s original thirteen-bynine city block grid, which would have been the main area populated when the original water system plans were initiated in the 1550s. As visible on the map of the pipeline system in 1613 (Figure 3), however, there is a clear concentration of concessions in the area just below (west and northwest of) the Caridad water tank, with distribution tapering off the farther outward one travels below this tank (especially to the southwest). The map of concessions along the municipal pipelines after 1613 demonstrates a similar geographic concentration, albeit with more connections, especially to the immediate southwest of the Caridad. The branching of Municipal Pipeline 3 speaks to the need to serve several key points, including religious institutions (e.g., the Jesuit Novitiate College and the Encarnacion Monastery, map references n and c, respectively), and residences of important people not included along prior municipal pipeline routes (e.g., Councilmen don Martin de Ampuero and don Diego de la Presa, map references i and j).

Straightforward social patterns are also apparent. Of the eighty concessions, seven were for public fountains, four were for government institutions (Cabildo and Viceregal), twenty were for religious or charitable institutions (including schools), and forty-nine were for private individuals. Of these private individuals, twenty-eight were for members of the Cabildo or their

Table 1 Chronology of the construction of the three original municipal pipelines based on the Libros de Cabildos de Lima: Initiation, progress, routes, and number of petitions for connections received by the Cabildo for each of the three public pipelines

|   Municipal pipeline | Date of project initiation                                               | Dates of progression and completion of project                                                                    | Notable points along the pipeline route                                                                                |   Number of petitions for connections (1578-1699) |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|
|                    1 | 1552 (Plans)                                                             | 1578 (Water arrives to the public fountain in Plaza Mayor); 1588 (Title to Santo Domingo Convent)                 | Plaza Mayor public fountain, Santo Domingo Convent                                                                     |                                                18 |
|                    2 | 1590 (Proposal);1594 (Plans);1595 (Initiation)                           | 1595-1596 (Construction); 1596 (Completion of the San Sebasti  an public fountain but water not yet flowing)                                                                                                                   | La Concepcion Monastery, San Mart  ın College (Jesuit), San Agust  ın Convent, San Sebasti  an public fountain                                                                                                                        |                                                22 |
|                    3 | 1590 (Proposal);1594 (Petition by neighbors and plans);1595 (Initiation) | 1596 (Progression of the project); 1602 (La Merced public fountain finished); 1612 (Water flowing to San Marcelo) | La Encarnacion Monastery, La Merced Convent and public fountain, Jesuit Novitiate College, San Marcelo public fountain |                                                23 |

<!-- image -->

Figure 3 Lima pipeline network up to 1613. This includes the three original municipal pipelines and the additional Santa Ana private pipeline. The symbols represent petitions for connections; it is not always possible to know the date of installation of a connection (or indeed whether the connection was ever installed). Keys for identifying references for each connection are found in Tables 4 through 7. Note references are case and font (italics) sensitive. Source: Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), Google Maps. (Color figure available online.)

Table 2 Units of measurement of water based on circumference of pipe opening

## Measurement

Real

Paja

## Description of amount

Pipe opening with circumference of a Segovian half-real coin [' una moneda de un medio real de a ocho segoviano '] (Cerd  an de Landa 1828, 23-24)

Pipe opening with circumference of an American peso coin [' un peso de moneda americana '] (Cerd  an de Landa 1828, 23-24); listed as equivalent to 1/16 of a real of water ( Real Academia Espa ~ nola 2014)

Note : The real was the biggest unit. There are references from 4 reales to 1 / 2 real and from 8 pajas to 1 / 2 quarter-paja (or 1 / 16 of a paja). This measurement was controlled at the opening in the reservoir or water tank ( caja de agua ) that fed the specific pipe leading to the site to which the license was awarded. This opening was called data and was preferably constructed of bronze or another durable material. The Libros de Cabildos de Lima does not make any mention of water pressure or volume of water flowing through the data over a period of time, although this obviously would impact actual amount of water. The Real Academia Espa ~ nola ( RAE 2014) also defines paja as a little more than 2 cm 3 /second. Bromley and Barbagelata (1945, 65), register paja as equivalent to the flow of 5,072 liters/24 hours, which is a much lesser volume than the RAE definition. Like many measurements, there was likely considerable variation by location and by time period. See also Aznar de Polanca (1727, 230-32) and Palerm and Chairez (2002, 227-51).

families. The vast majority of the remaining private individuals were of high status, including royal and viceregal of fi cials, church of fi cials, university rectors, and more. Women seem to be mentioned on water petitions only when they were high-status individuals themselves; for example, if they were daughters, mothers, or widows of conquistadores, Cabildo members, or high-ranking royal or viceregal of fi cials. Among the religious and charitable institutions, convents and monasteries received the most water: 82 percent of total water conceded (see Bell [forthcoming] for this calculation), with the Jesuits controlling the largest water concessions of all -nearly nine reales of water -among their various properties. 16

Taken together, the sociospatial patterns of the water concessions paint a picture of the distribution of power in the city. The Cabildo designed and implemented the original municipal water system and, not surprisingly, it served many of the homes of the mayors and councilmen. Indeed, many of these connections were awarded for free, in recognition of service to the pipeline projects and other public works. Public fountains, ostentatiously part of the original plans, experienced delays in construction and many interruptions in service. For example, in 1596 the San Sebastian fountain was completed but no water was fl owing ( LCL 19.IV.1596), in 1612 the drainage of the San Marcelo fountain failed, causing problems, and in 1621 the public fountains were found to be in a general state of disrepair ( LCL 5.VII.1621). When an important individual ' s house was located outside of the basic layout of the three pipelines, this layout was adjusted, as demonstrated by the repeated branching

Table 3 Chronology of petitions for water connections (1578-1699) recorded in the Libros de Cabildos de Lima

| Municipal pipeline   |   1578-1592 |   1593-1599 |   1600-1613 |   1614-1699 |   Total |
|----------------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|-------------|---------|
| 1                    |           3 |           2 |           7 |           6 |      18 |
| 2                    |           0 |          10 |           2 |          10 |      22 |
| 3                    |           0 |           3 |          11 |           9 |      23 |
| Total                |           3 |          15 |          20 |          25 |      63 |

of Pipeline 3 described earlier. Overall we fi nd that powerful people were living in close proximity to one another and that the municipal pipelines passed by many of their houses. Additional water connections were easier to install near previous connections. For example, Captain Juan Fernandez de Heredia ' s connection on Municipal Pipeline 3 (map reference i) was facilitated by the prior existence of a water storage tank at the corner of the Carvajal Statue ( Marmol de Carvajal ) that served both a public fountain and don Diego de la Presa ' s connection (map references k and i). Religious institutions also in fl uenced pipeline routes: The powerful Dominican, Franciscan, and Jesuit orders, among others, were all served by the original municipal pipelines. These features all contributed to the concentration of water connections in certain sectors of the city; power, wealth, status, and water connections went hand in hand.

Nearly no concessions were given to merchants or professionals (who were not royal of fi cials) and none at all to artisans, laborers, or other lower ranking members of society. The Indian neighborhood -Santiago del Cercado -was not served at all by the three original municipal pipelines and was only provided with one public fountain. 17 This neighborhood, reported to be home to 800 Indians and eighty African slaves in 1629 (Bromley and Barbagelata 1945, 59), provides a key illustration of the sociospatial patterns of access described earlier: The Cercado was actually located right along the water main leading from the springs to the Caridad water tank, very near to the main area with springs. Because it was located ' above ' the Caridad, however, it had only limited access to the city ' s drinking water (Ram  on 2011). The African population is only referenced with regard to the pipelines in terms of slave labor toward their construction and maintenance and as water sellers. These lower status populations used the public fountains, purchased water from sellers who made deliveries via mule cargo, or collected water from the river, even though from 1552 river water was considered too polluted for most domestic uses (Cogorno 2011).

After these three municipal pipelines were built the Cabildo received various petitions for the construction

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Lima pipeline network up to 1699. This includes the three original municipal pipelines and the additional pipelines, both municipal and private. The labels represent petitions for connections; it is not always possible to know the date of installation of a connection (or indeed whether the connection was ever installed). Keys for identifying references for each connection are found in Tables 4 through 7. Note references are case and font (italics) sensitive. Source: Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), 'Plan[o] Topogr  afico' (1787), Urrutia (2006), Google Maps. (Color figure available online.)

Table 4 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 1

| Link with the Cabildo/ indicator of social status   | Public center of the city Royal institution Public plaza Viceroy Royal institution Municipal institution City councilman, water judge (1570, 1575, 1581, 1583), commissioner for the public fountain project (1573, 1578-1580) City councilman, water judge   | (1597) Candle wax merchant                                                                    | Convent Widow of a conquistador and wealthy landowner Convent                                                                                  | City councilman, water judge (1584) Royally appointed doctor ( Protomedico de la ciudad ) Cathedral   | Sitting mayor (also 1617, 1619), special commissioner of pipelines (1602), pipeline commissioner (1617, 1619), son of past mayor Diego de Carvajal y Vargas (who worked on pipeline project), postmaster of colonial mails ( Correo Mayor ) Sitting mayor (also 1601,1609, 1615), pipeline commissioner (1609) Lawyer, Rector of San Marcos University in Lima (1605-1606, 1617-1618) J. P  erez de las Quentas was a royal mining official. B. Ni ~ no, his wife, was the daughter of Rodrigo Ni ~ no,                                                |
|-----------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                            | Public fountain Institution Public fountain Institution Institution Institution Private home                                                                                                                                                                  | Private home Private home                                                                     | Religious Private home Religious Private home Private home                                                                                     | Religious Private home                                                                                | Private home Private home Private home         |
| Cost                                                | N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | N/A N/A                                                                                       | N/A 400 pesos N/A 100 pesos 150 pesos                                                                                                          | N/A Free, in recognition of the service of his father                                                 | 100 pesos N/A N/A                              |
| Petition for (amount awarded)                       | N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | N/A N/A 4 pajas                                                                               | 1 / 4 paja ('cuartillo') Quantity not specified, later listed as 1 real 1 / 2 paja 1 / 2 paja 2 pajas (2 petitions of 1 paja in 1601 and 1602) | 1 paja                                                                                                | 1 paja 1 paja ( 1 / 2 paja awarded) 1 / 2 paja |
| Petition by/for                                     | Plaza Mayor public fountain Inquisition Inquisition plaza public fountain Viceroy's palace Royal jail Municipal jail Francisco Ortiz de Arbildo                                                                                                               | Gregorio Ortiz de Arbildo The house/store of Antonio Barrera Santo Domingo Convent, by Father | Reginaldo de Lizarraga (Prior) do ~ na Jordana Mejia (widow of Melchor Verdugo) San Francisco Convent Antonio de  Avalos Dr. I ~ nigo de Hormero (renewed by M. Hurtado de Hormero in 1634) Cathedral (by Joan de Palomares, majordomo of construction of the                                                                                                                                                | Church) don Diego de Carvajal                                                                         | General don Fernando de Cordoba y Figueroa Dr. Cipriano de Medina Licenciado Pedro Gonzalez de las Cuentas (with Juan P  erez de las Cuentas and Bernarda Ni ~ no)                                                |
| Petition date(s)                                    | No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613                                                                                                     | No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 15.II.1588                                        | 4.XI.1588, 11.XI.1588 20.IX.1591, 16.II.1595 14.4.1595 8.VI.1598, 3.VII.1598, 5.IV.1599,20.XI.1634 1.VI.1601, 25.I.1602                        | 19.IV.1602                                                                                            | 8.III.1604, 8.IV.1604 1.X.1604 24.X.1608       |
| Map reference number                                | A B C D E F G by fire after 1613; included in 5)                                                                                                                                                                                                              | H I (destroyed soon not Figure J                                                              | K L M N O                                                                                                                                      | P                                                                                                     | Q R S (probable location mapped)               |

## Downloaded by [RMIT University] at 08:26 19 August 2015

Table 4 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 1 (Continued)

| Link with the Cabildo/ indicator of social status   | Charitable institution Religious educational institution Canon of the Cathedral, advisor to the Cabildo (1601-1605), Rector of San Marcos University in Lima (1610-1611, 1616-1617, 1621- 1623), Archbishop of Mexico (1639) Postmaster of colonial mails, son and grandson of past mayors (see above: Diego de Carvajal) Sitting mayor (also 1639), pipeline commissioner (1654) Charitable institution Mayor (1679), Knight of the Order of Santiago Unspecified, described as having provided services to the Cabildo   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                            | Institution Religious Private home Private home Private home Institution Private home Private home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Cost                                                | N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Free N/A Free, for merits and services                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Petition for (amount awarded)                       | 1 paja 1 / 2 paja 1 / 2 paja 1 / 2 paja 1 paja ( 1 / 2 paja awarded) 1 paja 1 paja 1 / 2 paja                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Petition by/for                                     | Caridad: Hermandad, House, and Hospital, petition by Miguel Ochoa (majordomo) Seminary College, petition by Hernando de Guzman Dr. Feli ¸ ciano de Vega don Francisco de Carvajal Vargas y C  ordoba Captain don Pedro de Castro Isasaga La Casa de las Recogidas (women's shelter or spiritual retreat) General don Juan de Urdanegui don Lorenzo de Zarate Verdugo                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Petition date(s)                                    | 9.V.1609 26.I.1610, 11.V.1611, 19.V.1611, 20.V.1611 29.XI.1624 (renewal of unregistered title from 1604) F) 20.VII.1646 A) 13.XI.1654 30.VII.1668 20.XII.1680 15.IV.1681                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Map reference number                                | T U V W(not located, near X (not located, near Y Z AA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |

Note : The data in this table serve as the key for the map labels in Figures 3 and 4. This list was compiled using Bromley and Barbagelata's (1945) reconstruction of Lima's water system in 1613 and from the petitions recorded in the Libros de Cabildos de Lima . The connections listed as pre-1613 by Bromley and Barbagelata are not included in Tables 1 or 3. Of the twenty-seven connections, two were for public fountains, three for royal institutions, one for a municipal institution, six for religious or charitable institutions, and the remaining fifteen for private individuals. Of these individuals, nine were for mayors or city councilmen or families of Cabildo members. This includes three sitting mayors, three water judges, three pipeline commissioners, and one public fountain special project commissioner. The other private individuals were also high ranking, including families of conquistadores, a pr  otomedico (royally appointed doctor charged with regulating medical education and practice), two rectors of San Marcos University (the first university in Lima and in the Americas), a correo mayor (postmaster of the colonial mails), and a royal mining official. Several individuals have military titles, and about half have the honorific 'don' or 'do ~ na.' The wax seller Antonio Barrera seems out of place in this list, but the location of his well-known establishment, directly on the pipeline route, might indicate why he was included. Women seem to be mentioned on water petitions only when they are high-status individuals: The two mentioned here were a widow of a conquistador and a daughter of a mayor. There were two petitions for connection on Municipal Pipeline 1 with unidentifiable locations: Francisco de Carbajal (1646) and Pedro de Castro Ysasaga (1655). Biographical information comes from the Libros de Cabildos de Lima , Bromley (2005), Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), and Lohmann Villena (1983a, 1983b, 1983c, 1993).

Table 5 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 2

| Link with the Cabildo/ indicator of social status   | Nearby home owned by a past mayor (1561, 1564)                              | Monastery Sheriff of the Holy Office of the Inquisition ( Alguacil Mayor del Santo Oficio de Lima ) Sister of Dr. Diego de Salinas (see below), daughter of Lope de Salinas, a landowner ( hacendado ) and Lima neighbor ( vecino ) Royal scribe to several viceroys City councilman, named to a special commission to regulate water licenses in 1594; lawyer, professor, and rector at San Marcos (1601-1602)   | University Engineer; chief founder/metal worker of the viceroyalty ( Fundidor Mayor del Virreinato ) Public   | councilman, water judge (1605), merchant, uncle of Diego Nu ~ nez de Campoverde, who succeeded him as city councilman (see below), named to a special commission to regulate water licenses in 1594 councilman, nephew of Diego ~   | City City Nu nez de Figueroa, who he succeeded as city councilman (see above) College/school (secular but run by Jesuits) Lawyer for the Court of the Inquisition Charitable institution (hospital for the poor) College/school (secular) and Jesuit house Treasurer in charge of collecting city revenue ( Depositario General de la   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                            | Public fountain/fountain just outside a private home Religious Private home | Private home Private home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         | Private home Private home Public fountain                                                                     | of Private home Private home Private home Institution                                                                                                                                                                               | Religious Religious Private home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Cost                                                | N/A N/A N/A                                                                 | N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | N/A N/A N/A Charged to the                                                                                    | public works project Free, in recognition his work on pipeline project 400 pesos N/A                                                                                                                                                | 400 pesos Free N/A N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Petition for (amount awarded)                       | N/A N/A N/A                                                                 | N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | N/A N/A N/A N/A                                                                                               | paja paja paja paja paja ( 1 / 2 paja)                                                                                                                                                                                              | reales in addition to previous titles (1 1 / 2 reales total, including previous) real                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Petition by/for                                     | Fountain next to the house of don Lorenzo Estupi ~ n  an de Figueroa La Concepci  on Monastery                                                                             | don Juan Guti  errez Flores do ~ na Francisca de Salinas Alvar Ruiz de Navamuel y de los Rios Dr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   | Francisco de Le  on Garavito Bernardino de Tejeda Public fountain in San Sebasti  an                                                                                                               | church plaza Diego Nu ~ nez de Figueroa Diego N  u ~ nez de Campoverde and his wife do ~ na Maria Fajardo de Billaroel San Martin College (Jesuit), by Father Pablo Josepe (rector)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Dr. Diego de Salinas Holy Spirit Hospital, by Antonio Fernandez (majordomo) San Martin College and adjacent Jesuit residence, by Father Hernando de Mendoza (rector of the college) Licenciado Juan Martinez Rengifo                                                                                                                    |
| reference Petition date(s)                          | No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613           | No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613 No petition, pre-1613                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | No petition, pre-1613                                                                                         | No petition, pre-1613, but see also 28.VII.1595, 22.IX.1595, 19.IV.1596 24.IX.1593, 15.X.1593 6.V.1594, 12.VIII.1594 1.VII.1594 (see also petition                                                                                  | 14 below) 12.VIII.1594, 29.XI.1596 4.XI.1594 18.XI.1594 (see also petition 11 above) 9.XII.1594                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

## Downloaded by [RMIT University] at 08:26 19 August 2015

Table 5 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 2 (Continued)

| Link with the Cabildo/ indicator of social status   | Ciudad ), powerful landowner ( hacendado ) Convent Religious institution                                        | Royal treasurer ( Tesorero de la Real Hacienda ) Public Mayor (1608, 1616, 1626), pipeline                                                                                                                  | commissioner (1616) Seminary college                                                               | Official at the Inquisition (son of military captain, who likely submitted the original petition), Knight of Calatrava Chaplain to the Archbishop of Lima (priest) but previously had been wealthy merchant Treasurer for the Cathedral Religious hospital Mayor (1657), pipeline commissioner (1657) Religious institution Medical doctor, Pr  otomedico of the Royal Court (1673), Rector of San Marcos University (1690-1691) Widow of don Martin de Savala (mayor 1670)                                                                                |
|-----------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                            | Religious Religious Private home                                                                                | Public fountain Private home all Religious                                                                                                                                                                  | Private home Private home Private home Institution                                                 | Private home Religious Private home Private home                               |
| Cost                                                | N/A N/A 100 pesos                                                                                               | N/A 250 pesos The college will costs                                                                                                                                                                        | N/A 250 pesos 200 pesos                                                                            | N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A                                                            |
| Petition for (amount awarded)                       | 2 reales (1 1 / 2 reales) 1 real ( 1 / 2 real) 1 paja                                                           | N/A 1 paja Alter the course of a pipeline, install a new storage tank; 1 / 2 real in addition to the 1 1 / 2 reales already awarded to the Jesuits in 1594                                                  | Water (unspecified) 1 / 2 paja 1 / 2 paja Water for a fountain Water (unspecified)                 | 1 paja Fountain without drainage 1 / 2 paja                                    |
| Petition by/for                                     | San Agustin Convent Casa de San Jose (Jesuit), by Father Francisco de Vitoria (Rector) don Juan Manuel de Anaya | Public fountain in San Pedro church plaza don Juan de la Cueva y Villavicen ¸ cio San Pablo College (Jesuit)                                                                                                | don Francisco Gutierrez de Coca Diego Lopez de Lisboa Dr. don Juan de Cabrera San Agustin Hospital | don Nicolas Fernando de Villavicencio Jesuit offices ( Estudios ), by Father Rodrigo de Baldes Dr. don Francisco Bermejo y Rold  an do ~ na Theresa de Vilela y Esquivel                                                                                |
| reference Petition date(s)                          | 23.XII.1594, 28.II. 1622 6.XII.1599 14.XI.1603, 8.IV.1604                                                       | 1605 23.VI.1617 17.III.1625 (original title see above 16), 11.VII.1625, 14.VII.1625, 15.XII.1625 (petition for additional water); see also 5. VII.1627 and petition for private pipeline in 1630 8.VII.1631 | 24.IV.1634, 5.V.1634 6.XI.1643, 14.XI.1643 7.V.1666                                                | 13.I.1668 27.II.1670, 6.III.1670 22.X.1688 17.VII.1691, 29.V.1695, 29.VII.1695 |

Note : The data in this table serve as the key for the map labels in Figures 3 and 4. This list was compiled using Bromley and Barbagelata's (1945) reconstruction of Lima's water system in 1613 and from the petitions recorded in the Libros de Cabildos de Lima . The connections listed as pre-1613 by Bromley and Barbagelata are not included in Tables 1 or 3. Of the twenty-nine connections, three were for public fountains, nine for religious or charitable institutions, including schools, and the remaining seventeen for private individuals. Of these individuals, six were for mayors or city councilmen or families of Cabildo members. This includes a water judge, two pipeline commissioners, and two special commissioners for pipeline projects. The other private individuals were also high ranking, including royal officials (Inquisition officers, viceregal scribe, treasurers, chief viceregal engineer/founder) a pr  otomedico , a rector of San Marcos University, and Archbishopric and Cathedral officials (chaplain, treasurer). Of special interest here are the several petitions made by the Jesuits for their various properties (residences, seminary college, lay/secular school). The Jesuits ended up amassing the largest amount of water-nearly 9 reales total-using Municipal Pipeline 2 and a private pipeline for which a petition was submitted in 1630. The two women mentioned here were a daughter of a landowner and sister of an Inquisition official and a widow of a mayor. Biographical information comes from the Libros de Cabildos de Lima , Bromley (2005), Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), Lohmann Villena (1983a, 1983b, 1983c, 1993), and Sala Catal  a (1994).

Table 6 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 3

| Link with the Cabildo/indicator of social status   | Public fountain, part of original plan for municipal pipelines Viceregal sccretary Monastery Convent N/A Sitting mayor (also 1603, 1609), royal official in various capacities under   | Viceroy Marq  ues de Montesclaros (1607-1615) Convent of the Cathedral, Rector of San Marcos University (1612-1613, 1628)                                                                                                                                                        | Canon 1627- City councilman, pipeline commissioner (1608), Escribano Mayor de los Navios de la Mar del Sur (chief scribe of the Ships of the Southern Sea); his wife, Luisa de los R  ıos Navamuel, was daughter of Alvaro Ruiz de Navamuel y de los R  ıos (water connection 5,                                                          | Municipal Pipeline 2) City councilman (first mestizo city councilman: son of don Francisco de Ampuero, city councilman, and mayor and Inca Princess Do ~ na In  es Huaylas Yupanqui); water judge (1610)                                                                                                                                                                               | Public fountain Fernandez de Heredia was mayor in (1585); Solorzano Pereira was an a member judge of the Royal Court ( Oidor de la Real Audiencia ) Mayor (1618) Religious college Scribe/secretary of the Cabildo   |
|----------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                           | Public fountain Private home Religious Religious Private home Private home                                                                                                             | Religious Private home                                                                                                                                 | Private home                                             | Private home Public fountain Private home Private home                                                                                                                        | Religious Private home                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Cost                                               | Public works project by Cabildo N/A N/A Free 500 pesos N/A                                                                                                                             | N/A 450 pesos                                                                                                                                          | 250 pesos 100 pesos                                      | Public work to be paid for with a sisa tax 200 pesos (Solorzano Pereira paid the title was transferred) 100 pesos                                                             | this after Free N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Petition for(amount awarded)                       | Public fountain 1 paja N/A 3 reales 1 / 2 paja 1 paja                                                                                                                                  | Renew the water license 1 paja                                                                                                                         | 1 paja 1 paja                                            | Public fountain 1 / 2 paja 1 / 2 paja                                                                                                                                         | 1 paja 1 paja                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Petition by/for                                    | San Marcelo neighborhood don Antonio Xuarez de Medina La Encarnacion Monastery La Merced Convent Miguel de Solsona Captain don Juan D  avalos de Ribera (aka don Jusepe de Ribera y D  avalos)                                                                                                                                                                                        | Convent of the Nuns of the Holy Trinity, by do ~ na Lucre ¸ cia de Sansoles (Abbess) (original location, convent later moved) Dr. Andres Diaz de Abreu | don Diego de la Presa don Martin de Ampuero              | Public fountain at the Marmol de Carvajal Captain Juan Fernandez de Heredia; title transferred to Dr. Juan de Solorzano Pereira (1612) Captain don Diego de Ayala y Contreras | Jesuit Novitiate College ( Noviciado de la Compa ~ nia de Jesus ), by Hermano Eujenio Sanchez Alonso de Carrion                                                                                                      |
| Petition date(s)                                   | 1.VII.1594, 21.I.1605, 25.I.1605 9.IX.1594 No petition pre-1613 8.V.1598 6.III.1600, 3.VII.1600 14.VIII.1600                                                                           | 22.XII.1600, 22.XI.1602 18.11.1602                                                                                                                     | 20.VI.1602 4.XI.1602, 1.VIII.1603, 8.VIII.1603, 6.X.1603 | 25.I.1605 6.VII.1609, 2.III.1612, 12. III.1612, 3.VI.1619 15.I.1610, 29.XI.1610 26.XI.1610, 29.X.1612,                                                                        | 23.VII.1614, 24.VII.1614, 20.IV.1668 29.II.1610, 13.XII.1612                                                                                                                                                         |
| Map reference number                               | a b c d e f                                                                                                                                                                            | g h                                                                                                                                                    | i j                                                      | k l m                                                                                                                                                                         | n o                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

## Downloaded by [RMIT University] at 08:26 19 August 2015

Table 6 List of connections for Municipal Pipeline 3 (Continued)

| Link with the Cabildo/indicator of social status   | City councilman, pipeline commissioner (1614), city sheriff ( Alguacil Mayor ) (1573-1617) Hospital (for men)                                  | Sitting mayor (also 1652, 1673); pipeline commissioner (1652, 1653) City councilman, pipeline commissioner (1654-1658) Mayor (1648, 1681), city councilman, pipeline commissioner (1650-1683, except 1651) (1659, 1662-1664 no data) Member judge of the Royal Court, president of the Royal Court (1666- 1667), governor and general captain of Peru in the absence of the Viceroy (1666-1667) Unclear, but probably this is don Juan de la Presa y de la Cueva, who was mayor (1667, 1679), city councilman, pipeline commissioner (1667), grandson of Diego de la Presa (see above i) Widow of Maestro de Campo don Antonio de Llanos, mother of Pedro de Llanos Zapata (sitting mayor, also 1708, sitting pipeline commissioner) Mayor (1691, 1694), city councilman, water judge (1698), pipeline commissioner (1691, 1694)   |
|----------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Category                                           | Private home Institution Private home Private home                                                                                             | Private home Private home Private home Private home Private home                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Cost                                               | N/A Free, as a donation (obligated to provide public fountain in San Diego neighborhood or the Recoleta de Santo Domingo neighborhood) N/A N/A | N/A N/A N/A Free, for the services do ~ na Mariana, her husband, and their family N/A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
| Petition for(amount awarded)                       | 1 paja 1 paja 1 paja 1 paja                                                                                                                    | 1 / 2 paja 1 paja Data for his house 1 / 4 paja 1 paja                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Petition by/for                                    | Francisco Severino de Torres y Boh  orquez San Diego Hospital, by Fray Juan de Gra ¸ cia (Prior of San Diego convent) Captain don Francisco de la Cueva Guzman Juan de Figueroa                                                                                                                                                | don Ordo ~ no de Samudio Licenciado don Bernardo de Iturrizarra Captain don Juan de la Presa do ~ na Mariana Zapata Maestro de Campo don Gaspar Perales y Saavedra                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Petition date(s)                                   | 23.X.1615 10.XI.1634                                                                                                                           | 29.XII.1653 29.XII.1653 24.VII.1654 17.IX.1667 7.X.1689 9.II.1690 2.I.1697                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Map reference number                               | p q r s t (probable                                                                                                                            | location) u v w x                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |

Note : The data in this table serve as the key for the map labels in Figures 3 and 4. This list was compiled using Bromley and Barbagelata's (1945) reconstruction of Lima's water system in 1613 and from the petitions recorded in the Libros de Cabildos de Lima . The connections listed as pre-1613 by Bromley and Barbagelata are not included in Tables 1 or 3. Of the twenty-four connections, two were for public fountains, five for religious or charitable institutions, including a hospital, and the remaining seventeen were for private individuals. Of these individuals, thirteen were for mayors or city councilmen or families of Cabildo members. This includes two water judges and eight pipeline commissioners. The other private individuals were also high ranking, including two member judges of the Royal Court (one of whom was interim governor between Viceroys), a viceregal secretary, and a rector of San Marcos University (also Canon of the Cathedral). Again, the only woman mentioned seems to be in relation to her family members, especially her son, who was the sitting mayor. Of special note here is the branched form of the pipeline, which seems to be designed to include important individuals not served by the first two pipelines (e.g., Martin de Ampuero, j). Biographical information comes from the Libros de Cabildos de Lima , Bromley (2005), Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), and Lohmann Villena (1983a, 1983b, 1983c, 1993).

of private pipelines. Private pipelines were designed to serve only their fi nal points, and typically petitions could not be submitted to install additional connections to take water from along their courses (although there were several exceptions). The person or group who requested a private pipeline paid for its construction. These pipes generally served religious orders or neighborhoods where the municipal pipelines did not reach, which were called far neighborhoods ( LCL 28. XI.1651; San Crist  obal 2005). The Cabildo supervised the construction of at least twenty-one private pipelines between 1600 and 1700. Information about these pipelines is presented in Table 7 and they are mapped in Figure 4.

Examination of the petitions for private pipelines demonstrates that from the perspective of potable water provision, the city below the Caridad water tank was divided into two zones: that of ' above ' and that of ' below. ' The zone below suffered from continuous water shortages. This zone, identi fi ed as ' below the principal plaza ' and ' the bottom half of the city ' ( LCL 20.III.1629), included the far neighborhoods ( LCL 28. XI.1651) like La Merced, La Encarnaci  on, San Sebastian, San Marcelo, and Guadalupe (see also LCL 9. III.1620, 29.X.1671). These neighborhoods all had public fountains that experienced water shortages. The word below references actual topographic position but also location at the end of the pipelines; in other words, the lowest point in the water fl ow, to the northwest and southwest of the Plaza Mayor. These zones lacked water because those located above (along the pipeline) used the water, often taking water in excess of what their titles allowed and consequently letting little water fl ow to the end of the pipe ( LCL 9. III.1606, 11.VIII.1621, 20.III.1629). Other ' poor ' zones were left totally outside of the network; their residents had to buy water from water sellers or collect it themselves from distant public fountains or the river ( LCL 11.VII.1621, 20.III.1629). 18

The construction of private pipelines was an imperfect solution to the problem of supplying the general population with drinking water. For example, each monastery or convent that constructed a private pipeline was also required to install a public fountain for general use. In theory, this would contribute to a more egalitarian distribution of water. In practice, though, the convents did not comply with this obligation. In 1670, for instance, the Cabildo found that none of the public fountains were running as they should, and some were not even built ( LCL 3.IX.1670; see also 25. II.1671, 12.V.1671). These fountains are mapped in Figure 4, but this is an important case where installation of infrastructure did not necessarily equate to proper functioning of infrastructure. Therefore, in the second half of the century, the Cabildo decided that it was also necessary to expand the municipal pipeline network. It built two new municipal pipelines. The fi rst was built for a new fountain in the Plaza Mayor and was fi nished in 1650. The second was constructed to serve the San Marcelo neighborhood. Plans for this were initiated in 1668, although the pipeline was still not completed or functioning properly in 1692, mainly due to lack of funding ( LCL 20.IV.1668, 20.VII.1668, 30.VII.1668, 16.1.1669, 12.II.1669, 16.IX.1692). Details about these pipelines are also included in Table 7 and Figure 4.

In general, the Cabildo was not able to provide adequate drinking water to all of the residents of the city. Some problems were due to the slow construction of the municipal pipelines, like that of San Marcelo, which took nearly thirty years to complete. Others were due to the dif fi culty of controlling illegal water connections ( LCL 21.I.1605, 7.I.1611, 2.I.1636), which was compounded by the fact that the Cabildo lacked a registry -either a list or a map -that detailed the legal connections. The Cabildo had sought to create such a map of the pipelines and connections at several times throughout the seventeenth century without success (Bell 2012). In 1665 it ordered engineer Clemente de Mansilla to make a pipeline map, but he died before completing this work. In 1691 Pedro Fern  andez de Vald  es was similarly reprimanded for failing to submit his Cabildo-ordered map. As far as is known, the fi rst map of the pipeline network was made in 1787, of which only a copy from 1862 remains (Ram  on 2010). It is unclear why this project was so dif fi cult to complete, although it might relate to the way knowledge of the pipelines was stored: as practical working knowledge held by the engineers and their slaves. This was observed in Cabildo records from 1790, which described the ' depositing ' of knowledge of the water system in an elderly engineer and his still living slave (Ram  on 2011, 88).

From a broader perspective, it is easy to note social distinctions in the patterns of drinking water access that were both purposefully and inadvertently in fl uenced by the Cabildo ' s governance strategies. Even though the Cabildo (and some religious orders) employed a discourse supporting the necessity of providing water to all, and especially to poor neighborhoods, in reality it was the most powerful residents and the monasteries and convents that enjoyed running water. These areas were strategically located just below the Caridad water tank in the city center or, perhaps better said, the Caridad water tank had been strategically located near this neighborhood. No titles were awarded to either African or Indian individuals, and the Indian neighborhood (Santiago del Cercado) had only one public fountain, located ' above ' the Caridad water tank and thus in a relatively low-power location in the network. Moreover, the spatial distribution of the pipelines was one of the features that produced the differences between a rich neighborhood and a poor one. The division of water not only re fl ected social inequalities but also created and reinforced divisions between groups and zones. The expansion of the pipeline network in the seventeenth century shows that although Lima ' s hydraulic space was oriented by the physical location of the springs and the topography of the region, its form was not at

Table 7 Chronology of construction of twenty-one private pipelines and two additional municipal pipelines and information about water connections for each, 1606-1700

| Dates of progression and completion of pipeline   | 1606-1609 (Construction of water tank); 1623 (Unfinished);1629 (Fountain finished, water not flowing);1630-1632 (Fountain broken, no water); 1643 (Complaints about poor quality); 1651 (Water shortage) 1629-1630 (Under construction but with problems) ; 1640 (Construction of the fountain inside the convent)   | 1635 (Pipeline completed but broken); 1657 (Repairs)                                                                                                                                                                                                | 1643 (Petition to the Cabildo for assistance with repairs)   | 1656-1657 (Construction); 1662 - 1665 (Construction); 1665 (Completed); 1685 (Petition to redo the work)   | 1671 (Project complete) 1650-1660 (Construction); 1667 (Repairs); 1682-1683 (Repairs)   | 1659 (Repairs); 1682 (Renewal of license)                                      |                                                   | 1672 (Problems with construction);1688 (Funding problems);1692 (Fountain completed but no water flowing to San Marcelo); 1699 (Repairs)       |                   |                               |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------|
| Date of pipeline initiation                       | 1606 (Petition by Santa Ana neighbors); 1617 (Renewed petition); 1620 (Plans) 1619 (Petition); 1622 awarded and                                                                                                                                                                                                      | (License plans) 1624 (Petition) (Jesuits) 1630 (Petition) 1633 (Petition)                                                                                                                                                                           | Before 1643 1645                                             | (Petition for water) ; 1662 (Plans for private pipeline) 1646 (Petition) ;1646; (Plans)                    | 1647 (Plans); 1648 (Plans) 1651 (Petition)                                              | 1654 (Petition) 1657 (Petition) ; 1657 (Plans) 1657 (Petition) 1660 (Petition) |                                                   | 1668 (Petition); 1668-1670 (Plans)                                                                                                            | 1668 (Petition)   | 1668 (Petition); 1668 (Plans) |
| Pipeline name                                     | Santa Ana San Agust  ın                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Santa Clara Compa ~ n  ıa de Jes  us La Recoleta                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     | Las Descalzas de San Jos                                     | Holy Trinity Santa Catalina                                                                                | Plaza Mayor (Municipal) San Andr  es                                                                                         | Prado La Concepci  on San L  azaro San Bartolom  e San Ildefonso                                                                                | San Francisco                                     | San Marcelo (Municipal)                                                                                                                       | Bel  en                   | Santo Domingo                 |
| Connection                                        | don Francisco de Balen ¸ cuela Loaysa (petition 1604) Santa Ana neighborhood public fountain (1606)                                                                                                                                                                                                                  | San Agustin Convent (1619) San Sebastian neighborhood public fountain (1622) Santa Rosa Convent (petition 1687, installed 1699) Santa Clara Monastery (1624) San Pablo Seminary College (1630) San Martin Secular College (1630) La Recoleta (1633) | San Diego neighborhood public fountain (1633) Convent of the Discalced Nuns of San Jos  e ( Las Descalzas San Jos  e) (before 1643) Holy Trinity College (1645)                                                              | Santa Catalina Monastery (1646) Plaza Mayor public fountain                                                | San Andr  es neighborhood public fountain (1651)                                                                                         | San Andr  es Hospital (n.d.) Manuel de la Vega (1672) Our Lady of Prado Monastery (1654) La Concepcion Monastery (1657) San L  azaro Hospital (1657) San Bartolom  e Hospital (1660) Pedro Fern  andez de Vald  es (1690) San Ildefonso College (n.d.)                                                                                | Francisco de Haro (1666) Francisco Convent (n.d.) | San Pedro Hospital (1667) San Marcelo neighborhood public fountain (1668) don Gabriel de Vega y Rinaga (1668) Jesuit Novitiate College (1668) | Orphan Girls Charity (1669) Fernando N  u ~ nes de Sanabria (1692) Captain don Bernardo de Gurmendi (1692) Guadalupe College (1699) La Recoleta de Bel  en (1668)                   | Bel  en street public fountain (1668) Santo Domingo Convent (1668) do ~ na Ana de Zol  orzano y Velasco (1670)                               |
| Map reference number                              | 1 2 3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                | 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | 11 12                                                        | 13 14                                                                                                      | 15                                                                                      | 16 17 * not mapped 18 19 20 21 22 23 24                                        | Captain 25 San 26                                 | 27 28 *Probable location 29                                                                                                                   | 30 31 32 33 34 35 | 36 37                         |

Table 7 Chronology of construction of twenty-one private pipelines and two additional municipal pipelines and information about water connections for each, 1606-1700

(Continued)

| Dates of progression and completion of pipeline   |                                 |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|
| Date of pipeline initiation                       | 1689 (Petition) 1690 (Petition) | 1695 (Petition)                 | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                | n.d.                                |
| Pipeline name                                     | Nolasco Trinitarias             | Las Mercedarias                 | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             | Cercado                             |
| Connection                                        | Nolasco College (1689) Convent of the Discalced Nuns of the de la Sant  ısima Trinidad ) (1690)                                 | (Sanctorum) de la Merced (n.d.) | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain | Indian neighborhood public fountain |
| Map reference                                     |                                 | Beaterio                        | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              | (1695)                              |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          | El Cercado                          |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            | Hospital                            |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  | El                                  |
|                                                   | Holy                            |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|                                                   | San Pedro Las                   |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|                                                   | ( Las Descalzas                 |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|                                                   | Trinity                         |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              | (n.d.)                              |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          | Incurables                          |
|                                                   | San Pedro                       |                                 |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |                                     |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  | 40                                  |
|                                                   |                                 |                                 |                                     | 39                                  | 39                                  | 39                                  | 39                                  | 39                                  | 39                                  | 39                                  |                                     |
| number                                            |                                 |                                 |                                     | 38                                  | 38                                  | 38                                  | 38                                  | 38                                  | 38                                  | 38                                  |                                     |

Note : Text in italics indicates data from San Crist  obal (2005, 206-33), and all other information is from the Libros de Cabildos . Pipelines are private unless noted as municipal. Most private pipelines served only their final points, usually a religious or charitable institution, and perhaps a public fountain near this final point. There are, however, several examples of unrelated private individuals being awarded connections along a private pipeline (e.g., don Francisco de Balen ¸ cuela Loaysa on the Santa Ana Pipeline). There was one petition for connection on the San Andr  es private pipeline with an unidentified location: Manuel de la Vega (1672).

all natural; the design clearly depended on the social geography of the city. This design and the concession of licenses -both controlled by the Cabildo -was integral in determining who had direct water access and who did not.

## Discussion and Conclusions

Lima ' s hydraulic space was oriented by the east -west fl ow of the Rímac River and the location of the springs to the northeast and topographically above the city. The installation of its components, though, especially the drinking water pipeline, followed the desires, objectives, and values of Lima ' s human residents more than it did natural features. The LCL demonstrates that effective governance of Lima ' s hydraulic space was dif fi cult. The Cabildo repeatedly failed to achieve its primary objective of securing a clean and copious fl ow of drinking water in the municipal pipeline network. Problems with water supply were nearly always attributed to infrastructural and management problems, rather than ' natural ' issues like aquifer depletion or spring location. Although biophysical aspects of water availability and conduction were signi fi cant to drinking water supply, especially the seasonality of aquifer levels and the slope needed for gravity-based fl ow, drinking water access was most closely linked to the installation of infrastructure and to the spatial proximity down- fl ow from the Caridad water tank. The unequal distribution of drinking water infrastructure re fl ected colonial social divisions but also helped to create and widen gaps between groups based on access to water. Although the Cabildo made grand statements about the importance of providing water to all city residents, only the most powerful members of colonial society had running water in their homes.

This interpretation of Lima ' s municipal water system was only possible through interrogation of the Cabildo archives from a political ecology perspective. Most signi fi cantly, this perspective asks direct questions about the linked biophysical, material, social, political, and economic in fl uences on patterns of water access of individuals, groups, and regions. Political ecological analysis of contemporary urban drinking water systems shows strong inequality in access, and historical cases like that of Lima suggest that such patterns are not new (although the speci fi c relationships between past inequality and current conditions need to be clearly demonstrated and not assumed). Bakker ' s (2003) archipelago metaphor is also helpful for historical water analysis because it suggests that multiple, overlapping strategies are commonly used in urban drinking water delivery, including public and private supply systems, and that spatial coverage of water infrastructure is typically partial and uneven. This level of nuance is not always considered in historical situations, even though it was likely present. Finally, political ecological work has shown how uneven water access also leads to further social differentiation and thus shapes and in fl uences power relations, instead of merely re fl ecting or responding to them (Swyngedouw 1999; Gandy 2004; Loftus 2009). This can also be observed at a broader level, in terms of urban -rural relations, and usually results in signi fi cant urban bias. In colonial Lima, the governance strategies applied in the management of potable water resources not only led to the development of the urban space and the speci fi c sociospatial patterns of access to water within the city but also contributed to differentiation between urban and rural spaces. A signi fi cant urban bias was observed, with the city ' s hydraulic reach or water footprint extending beyond the urban zone into surrounding farmland. Although these questions and approaches might seem basic to political ecology, they have not frequently been applied to the study of early colonial natural resource access and never before to water in colonial Peru.

The relationship between the history of water systems and the history of cities also warrants further consideration (Swyngedouw, Kaika, and Castro 2002; Gandy 2003, 2004; Swyngedouw 2004). As Bakker (2003, 332) wrote, ' The water network is, in part, an artefact of urbanization. ' Given the great investment in construction and the dif fi culty of changing a pipeline network already built, water systems typically re fl ect water needs at one point in time and generally only cover a portion of a city, usually the most af fl uent part. Although such observations are generally made for contemporary urban situations, they are also true for colonial Lima and likely for other colonial Spanish cities in the Americas, which were established early in the colonial period and incorporated complicated and sophisticated water systems from the start. There are interesting remnants and traces of these colonial water systems in modern ones. For example, even though the city of Lima now draws drinking water from distant Andean lakes, the location of the Atarjea spring used from 1578 is still the location of Lima ' s central reservoir and water treatment plant (SEDAPAL 2013). This speaks to an enduring orientation of Lima ' s hydraulic space, even amidst modernization, development, and great change. With further historical analysis, it might be possible to reconstruct additional legacies of the colonial system with greater signi fi cance to modern patterns of water access.

There are clear advantages of applying a political ecology approach to historical water systems, but moving backward in time has methodological implications for the types of questions that can be asked and the types of data that might be available. Closer attention to material traces left on the landscape, including both biophysical and sociocultural features, is necessary, and a useful guide can be found in the hydraulic archaeology approach. In this article, I used written descriptions to explain the design and construction as well as the day-to-day management of infrastructure. In other cases, archaeological analysis of infrastructure might provide a useful complement, as historical documents have signi fi cant limitations for a political

ecological analysis. With the LCL we have only the fi nalized or ' clean ' version of the Cabildo meeting agendas, and rarely hear dissent among Cabildo members, let alone direct contributions from lesser heard voices, like Indians or African slaves. The LCL and other similar sources do, however, provide key insights into ' how Europeans conceptualized ' their ' colonial landscapes and how those imaginations produced material consequences for colonized people, environments and wildlife ' (Offen 2004, 29). In the case of Lima ' s water, we have a clear representation of the administrative, legal, engineering, and measurement concepts developed and applied to water. Understanding these colonial practices and conceptualizations, as well as their consequences and legacies for postcolonial resource management and environmental science, is a principal goal of historical political ecology (Offen 2004; D. K. Davis 2009). Although here I have delved only brie fl y into one history of water access, I have endeavored to show the utility of the historical political ecology perspective for explaining sociospatial patterns of natural resource access in the past. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

I would like to thank Penn State dissertation committee members Karl Zimmerer, Derek Holdsworth, Brian King, James McCarthy, and David Webster for their comments. I am grateful to my Riva-Ag € uero research team: Gabriel Ram  on, Gilda Cogorno, Marcos Alarc  on, and Mois  es Cueva, as well as to Nicanor Domínguez. This research bene fi ted from participants in the Historical Political Ecology sessions at the 2014 Association of American Geographers meetings. I am grateful also to the 2014 Nystrom Award Review committee, to Editor Barney Warf, and to three anonymous reviewers.

## Funding

This research was funded by a Fulbright-Hays Doctoral Dissertation Research Abroad grant, a National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement grant, and a group research grant from the Riva-Ag € uero Institute of the Ponti fi cial Catholic University of Peru.

## Notes

- 1 On pre-Hispanic canals see Narv  aez Luna (2013).

2 The Cabildo was a Spanish colonial institution with roots in thirteenth- and fourteenth-century Castile responsible for governing a municipality and its surrounding region (Moore 1954). During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, a Cabildo of a metropolis ( ciudad ) like Lima was made up of two mayors ( Alcaldes Ordinarios ) and twelve councilmen or alderman ( Regidores ), selected from the highest social classes of the city. The Cabildo claimed authority in Lima and its hinterland over issues such as urban planning and land grants; trade and business; food production, supply, and distribution; water rights and

- infrastructure; management of natural resources (e.g., fi rewood, pasture); and social support (e.g., assistance for the poor, education, annual fi estas). The Cabildo governed through nomination of commissioners and inspectors from among the mayors and city councilmen, as well as through appointment of outside specialists like engineers, architects, police of fi cials, surveyors, measurement inspectors, and secretaries.
- 4 The LCL do not describe matters that fell outside of the Cabildo ' s authority. This source is virtually silent on topics dealing with territory beyond Lima ' s jurisdiction and contains little information on non-Spanish populations. The LCL should be considered a ' fi nal draft ' of the written minutes of meetings and does not provide much information about dissention or disagreement among members of this institution.
- 3 The LCL includes forty- fi ve volumes covering 1535 through 1824. The fi rst twenty-three volumes, 1534 through 1639, were transcribed and published (Lee and Bromley [1534 -1637] 1935 -1964); the remaining volumes are held as handwritten manuscripts at the Historical Archive of the Municipality of Lima ( AHML ). Book #2, referring to 1540 through 1544, has been missing since the sixteenth century.
- 5 Locations of these connections and pipeline routes were mapped through textual description in the LCL and the valuable previous reconstruction of Lima ' s pipelines found in Bromley and Barbagelata (1945). See also Urrutia (2006).
- 7 For analysis of Lima ' s demography and social diversity, see Bromley and Barbagelata (1945), Moore (1954), Keith (1976), Cushner (1980), Lohmann Villena (1983a, 1983b, 1983c, 1993), Lockhart (1994), Vergara Orme ~ no (1995), Charney (2001), Bromley (2005), Guti  errez (2005), and Quiroz (2008).
- 6 The citation style used for the LCL references the date of the Cabildo meeting ( LCL Day.Month [Roman Numeral].Year); this is the reference style used in Guti  errez (2005).
- 8 Prior to this date special commissioners were selected as necessary for the pipeline projects.
- 10 This man was given a title that evolved from someone named for the ' cleaning and dressing of the pipes, reservoirs, and fountains of water ' in the beginning of the century, to the much higher sounding ' chief fountaineer ' ( Fontanero Mayor ) by its end (from 1689).
- 9 Between 1611 and 1699 there are nine years for which there are no data on the naming of commissioners, mainly due to missing pages in the LCL .
- 11 The continuation was notable: Juan de Mansilla took over when his father Clemente died ( LCL 29.III.1635); likewise, Pedro Fern  andez de Vald  es replaced Juan de Mansilla when he died ( LCL 1.I.1666). In 1706, Pedro was replaced by his own son Miguel Fern  andez de Vald  es, who had assisted him for many years ( LCL 2. I.1706).
- 13 For more information on the legal aspects of extending Lima ' s urban hydraulic reach to these ' rural ' canals see Bell (forthcoming).
- 12 Mansilla said that Angola had been very skilled in repairing pipes and distributing water, and after Angola died, Mansilla complained that now he had too much work to do himself and had to use two slaves ( LCL 18.IV.1654). There is another reference to the two slaves who worked for Pedro Fern  andez de Vald  es who ' risked life by always being in the water ' ( LCL 15.VII.1667).

- 14 For an illustration of the Plaza Mayor and its fountain from 1680, see the painting published in Kagan (2011, Figure 6.2).
- 16 These concessions supplied water to hundreds (if not thousands) of residents and water users of the various convents, monasteries, colleges, schools, and hospitals managed by the religious orders, and speci fi c patterns of access within these properties have yet to be analyzed in detail. On a per capita basis, it is probably safe to assume that private homes received more water than religious orders.
- 15 This includes the public fountains that were part of the Cabildo ' s original design for the municipal pipelines and did not require special petitions. There were four other petitions for which it was not possible to identify pipeline:  Albaro de Alcocer (1598), don Manuel Artero de Loaysa (1673), Juan Bermudo de la Vega (1673; on the same pipeline as Manuel Artero de Loaysa), and don Pedro Balthazar Merino de Heredia (1692; on the same pipeline as Manuel Artero de Loaysa).
- 17 Unfortunately the date of this construction is unknown, although it is likely post-1650. In 1617, this area was served by a small canal (Domínguez 1988).
- 18 In 1671, a mule ' s load of water cost three reales (the monetary coin, not the water measure; LCL 29.X.1671).

## Literature Cited

- Aznar de Polanco, J. C. 1727. Arithmetica inferior y geometria practica y especulativa: Origen de los nacimientos de las aguas dulces y gordas de esta Coronada Villa de Madrid [Common arithmetic and practical and speculative geometry: Origin of the freshwater sources of this city of Madrid]. Madrid, Spain: Francisco Martinez Abad.
- Bakker, K. 2003. Archipelagos and networks: Urbanization and water privatization in the South. The Geographical Journal 169 (4): 328 -41.
- ---. 2011. Commons versus commodities: Political ecologies of water privatization. In Global political ecology , ed. R. Peet, P. Robbins, and M. Watts, 347 -70. London and New York: Routledge.
- Barcel  o, M. 1996. Saber lo que es un espacio hidr  aulico y lo que no es o Al-Andalus y los feudales [On knowing what is an hydraulic space and what is not, or, Al-andalus and the feudal]. In El agua que no duerme , ed. M. Barcel  o, H. Kirchner, and C. Navarro, 75 -90. Granada, Spain: El legado Andalusi.
- ---. 2004. The missing water-mill: A question of technological diffusion in the High Middle Ages. In The making of feudal agricultures? , ed. M. Barcel  o and F. Sigaut, 255 -314. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
- Bell, M. 2012. Maps, management and mills in colonial Lima, Peru (1532 -1821). Imago Mundi 64 (1): 129 -32.
- ---. Forthcoming. Agua y poder colonial: Ciclos, fl ujos y procesiones en el manejo hidr  aulico urbano en Lima durante el siglo XVII [Water and colonial power: Cycles, fl ows, and processions in urban water management of Lima, during the 17th century]. Boletín del Instituto RivaAg € uero 37.
- Biehler, D. D. 2009. Permeable homes: A historical political ecology of insects and pesticides in US public housing. Geoforum 40 (6): 1014 -23.
- Brannstrom, C. 2004. What kind of history for what kind of political ecology? Historical Geography 32:71 -87.
- Bromley, J. 2005. Las viejas calles de Lima [The old streets of Lima]. Lima, Peru: Municipalidad Metropolitana de Lima.
- Bromley, J., and J. Barbagelata. 1945. Evoluci  on urbana de Lima [Urban evolution of Lima]. Lima, Per  u: Talleres gr  a fi cos de la editorial Lumen.
- Brooks, D. B., and J. Linton. 2011. Governance of transboundary aquifers: Balancing ef fi ciency, equity and sustainability. International Journal of Water Resources Development 27 (3): 431 -62.
- Carey, M. 2010. In the shadow of melting glaciers: Climate change and Andean society . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Carey, M., A. French, and E. O ' Brien. 2012. Unintended effects of technology on climate change adaptation: An historical analysis of water con fl icts below Andean Glaciers. Journal of Historical Geography 38 (2): 181 -91.
- Carney, J. A. 2001. Black rice: The African origins of rice cultivation in the Americas . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Cerd  an de Landa, A. S. P. 1828. Tratado jeneral [sic] sobre las aguas que fertilizan los valles de Lima [General treatise about the waters that fertilize the valleys of Lima]. Lima, Peru: Imprenta de la Libertad.
- Charney, P. 2001. Indian society in the valley of Lima, Peru, 1532 -1824 . Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
- Cogorno, G. 2011. Hidr  aulica urbana de Lima: Espacio y gobierno, 1535 -1596 [Urban hydraulics of Lima: Space and government]. In Informe Finale, Proyecto ' Arqueología hidr  aulica colonial: Autoridades, infraestructura y redes políticas (Lima, 1535 -1796) . Lima, Peru: Instituo Riva-Ag € uero.
- Cushner, N. P. 1980. Lords of the land: Sugar, wine, and Jesuit estates of coastal Peru, 1600 -1767 . Albany: State University of New York Press.
- Davis, D. K. 2007. Resurrecting the granary of Rome: Environmental history and French colonial expansion in North Africa . Athens: Ohio University Press.
- ---. 2009. Historical political ecology: On the importance of looking back to move forward. Geoforum 40 (3): 285 -86.
- Davis, M. 2004. The political ecology famine: The origins of the Third World. In Liberation ecologies: Environment, development, social movements , ed. R. Peet and M. Watts, 48 -63. London and New York: Routledge.
- Domínguez, N. 1988. Aguas y legislaci  on en los valles de Lima: El repartimiento de 1617 [Waters and legislation in the valleys of Lima: The distribution of 1617]. Boletín del Instituto Riva-Ag € uero 15:119 -54.
- End fi eld, G. H. 2008. Climate and society in colonial Mexico: A study in vulnerability . Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- End fi eld, G. H., and I. Fern  andez Tejedo. 2006. Decades of drought, years of hunger: Archival investigations of multiple year droughts in late colonial Chihuahua. Climatic Change 75 (4): 391 -419.
- Gandy, M. 2003. Concrete and clay: Reworking nature in New York City . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
- ---. 2004. Rethinking urban metabolism: Water, space and the modern city. City 8 (3): 363 -79.
- Glick, T. F. 2005. Islamic and Christian Spain in the early Middle Ages . Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill.
- Glick, T. F., and H. Kirchner. 2000. Hydraulic systems and technologies of Islamic Spain: History and archaeology. Technology and Change in History 3:267 -330.
- Guti  errez, L. ed. 2005. Lima en el siglo XVI [Lima in the 16th century]. Lima, Peru: Ponti fi cia Universidad Cat  olica del Per  u.
- Jepson, W. 2012. Claiming space, claiming water: Contested legal geographies of water in south Texas. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (3): 614 -31.

- Kagan, R. L. 2011. Projecting order. In Mapping Latin America: A cartographic reader , ed. J. Dym and K. Offen, 46 -50. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Kaika, M. 2005. City of flows: Modernity, nature, and the city . London and New York: Routledge.
- Keith, R. G. 1976. Conquest and agrarian change: The emergence of the hacienda system on the Peruvian coast . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Kirchner, H., and C. Navarro. 1996. Objetivos, m  etodos y pr  actica de la arqueología hidr  aulica [Objectives, methods and practice in hydraulic archaeology]. In El agua que no duerme , ed. M. Barcel  o, H. Kirchner, and C. Navarro, 92 -118. Granada, Spain: El legado Andalusi.
- Lane, K. M. D. 2011. Water, technology, and the courtroom: Negotiating reclamation policy in territorial New Mexico. Journal of Historical Geography 37 (3): 300 -11.
- Lee, B. T., and J. Bromley. [1534 -1637] 1935 -1964. Libros de Cabildos de Lima [Books of the City Council of Lima]. Lima, Peru: Sanmartí.
- Lerner, D. N., M. Mansell-Moullin, D. J. Dellow, and J. W. Lloyd. 1982. Groundwater studies for Lima, Peru. Optimal Allocation of Water Resources (Proceedings of the Exeter Symposium) 135:17 -30.
- Lockhart, J. 1994. Spanish Peru, 1532 -1560: A social history . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Loftus, A. 2009. Rethinking political ecologies of water. Third World Quarterly 30 (5): 953 -68.
- ---. 2011. Geographical perspectives on a radical political ecology of water. In Applied urban ecology , ed. M. Richter and U. Weiland, 193 -203. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
- Lohmann Villena, G. 1983a. Los regidores andaluces del Cabildo de Lima [Andalusian councilmen of the city council of Lima]. Paper presented at Actas de las II Jornadas de Andalucía y Am  erica, Sevilla, Spain.
- ---. 1983b. Los Regidores del Cabildo de Lima [The councilmen of the city council of Lima]. In Estudios sobre la ciudad iberoamericana , ed. F. d. Solano, 162 -215. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientí fi cas, Instituto Gonzalo Fern  andez de Oviedo.
- ---. 1983c. Los regidores perpetuos del Cabildo de Lima (1535 -1821): Cr  onica y estudio de un grupo de gesti  on [The permanent councilmen of the city council of Lima (1535 -1821): Chronicle and study of a management group]. Vol. 2. Sevilla, Spain: Excma. Diputaci  on Provincial de Sevilla.
- ---. 1993. Los americanos en las  ordenes nobiliarias [Americans in Noble Orders]. Vol. 1. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientí fi cas.
- McCarthy, J. 2002. First world political ecology: Lessons from the Wise Use movement. Environment and Planning A 34 (7): 1281 -1302.
- Moore, J. P. 1954. The Cabildo in Peru under the Hapsburgs . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Narv  aez Luna, J. J. 2013. Pre-colonial irrigation and settlement patterns in three artificial valleys in Lima, Peru . Department of Archaeology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada.
- Norman, E. S., and K. Bakker. 2008. Transgressing scales: Water governance across the Canada -U.S. borderland. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 99 (1): 99 -117.
- Offen, K. 2004. Historical political ecology: An introduction. Historical Geography 32:19 -42.
- Palerm, J., and C. Chairez. 2002. Medidas antiguas de agua [Old water measurements]. Relaciones: Estudios de Historia y Sociedad 23 (92): 227 -51.
- Peet, R., and M. Watts. 2004. Liberation ecology: Development, sustainability, and environment in an age of market triumphalism. In Liberation ecologies: Environment development social movements , ed. R. Peet and M. Watts, 3 -47. London and New York: Routledge.
- Quintana, J., and J. Tovar. 2002. Evaluaci  on del acuífero de Lima (Per  u) y medidas correctoras para contrarrestar la sobreexplotaci  on [Evaluation of the Lima (Peru) aquifer and the correct methods to counter overexploitation]. Boletín Geol  ogico y Minero 113 (3): 303 -12.
- Quiroz, F. 2008. Artesanos y manufactureros en Lima colonial [Artisans and manufacturers in colonial Lima]. Lima, Peru: Banco Central de Reserva del Per  u/IEP.
- Raimondi, A. [1824]2009. Aguas minerales y potables del Per  u: Autoridad científica y nuevos espacios de consagraci  on republicanos [Mineral and potable waters of Peru: Scienti fi c authority and new opportunities for Republican efforts]. Lima, Peru: Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Ediciones del Vicerrectorado Acad  emico, Golden Associates: Asociaci  on Educacional Antonio Raimondi.
- Ram  on, G. 2010. Ilustrar la urbe: Planos de Lima borb  onica [To illustrate the city: Maps of bourbon Lima]. Illapa 7:62 -79.
- ---. 2011. El espacio hidr  aulico ilustrado: Jerarquías intraurbanas y el Plan[o] Topogr  a fi co de 1787 [The illustrated hydraulic space: Intra-urban hierarchies and the Topographic Map of 1787]. In Informe Finale, Proyecto ' Arqueología hidr  aulica colonial: autoridades, infraestructura y redes políticas (Lima, 1535 -1796). ' Lima, Peru: Instituo Riva-Ag € uero.
- Real Academia Espa ~ nola (RAE). 2014. Diccionario de la lengua espa ~ nola [Dictionary of the Spanish language]. Madrid: Real Academia Espa ~ nola.
- Ribot, J., and N. Peluso. 2003. A theory of access. Rural Sociology 68 (2): 153 -81.
- Robbins, P. 2004. Political ecology: A critical introduction . London: Blackwell.
- Sala Catal  a, J. 1994. Ciencia y t  ecnica en la metropolizaci  on de Am  erica [Science and technology in the metropolization of America]. Madrid: Doce Calles, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cienti fi cas.
- San Crist  obal, A. 1993. Los alarifes de la ciudad en Lima durante el siglo XVII [Engineers of the city of Lima during the 17th century]. Laboratorio de Arte 6:120 -55.
- ---. 2005. Obras civiles en Lima durante el siglo XVII [Civil works in Lima of the 17th century]. Lima, Peru: Universidad Nacional de Ingeniería.
- Scott, C. A., and N. P. Pablos. 2011. Innovating resource regimes: Water, wastewater, and the institutional dynamics of urban hydraulic reach in northwest Mexico. Geoforum 42 (4): 439 -50.
- SEDAPAL. 2013. Nuestra empresa: Ubicaci  on geogr  afica [Our company: Geographic location]. http://www.sedapal.com. pe/5 (last accessed 17 April 2013).
- Sluyter, A. 1999. The making of the myth in postcolonial development: Material-conceptual landscape transfo rmation in sixteenth-century Veracruz. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 (3): 377 -401.
- Swyngedouw, E. 1997. Power, nature, and the city: The conquest of water and the political ecology of urbanization in Guayaquil, Ecuador: 1880 -1990. Environment and Planning A 29 (2): 311 -32.
- ---. 1999. Modernity and hybridity: Nature, regeneracionismo, and the production of the Spanish waterscape, 1890 -1930. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89 (3): 443 -65.

- ---. 2004. Social power and the urbanization of water: Flows of power . New York: Oxford University Press.
- Swyngedouw, E., M. Kaika, and E. Castro. 2002. Urban water: A political-ecology perspective. Built Environment 28 (2): 124 -37.
- Turner, M. D. 2009. Ecology: Natural and political. In A companion to environmental geography , ed. N. Castree, D. Demeritt, D. Liverman, and B. Rhoads, 181 -97. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
- Urrutia, J. 2006. La ciudad de Lima, la atarjea y el agua [The city of Lima, the reservoir, and the water]. Lima, Peru: Museo Nacional de Arqueología, Antropología e Historia del Per  u.
- Vergara Orme ~ no, T. 1995. Hombres, tierras y productos: Los valles comarcanos de Lima (1532 -1650) [Men, lands and produce: The valleys surrounding Lima (1532 -1650)]. Lima, Peru: Ponti fi cia Universidad Cat  olica del Per  u, Instituto Riva-Ag € uero.
- Watts, M. J. 1983. Silent violence: Food, famine and peasantry in Northern Nigeria . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Zimmerer, K. S. 2000. Rescaling irrigation in Latin America: The cultural images and political ecology of water resources. Cultural Geographies 7 (2): 150 -75.
- Zimmerer, K. S., and T. J. Bassett. 2003. Approaching political ecology: Society nature, and scale in human -environment studies. In Political ecology: An integrative approach to geography and environment-development studies , ed. K. S. Zimmerer and T. J. Bassett, 1 -25. New York: Guilford.

MARTHA G. BELL is the Global Interactions Postdoctoral Researcher at Leiden University Institute for Area Studies, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands. E-mail: m.g.bell@hum. leidenuniv.nl. Her research interests include the history of land and natural resource use and the history of agricultural practices and hydraulic technologies in Peru and Latin America.