<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Precarious Participation: Assessing Inequality and Risk in the Carbon Credit Commodity Chain

## Jonathan Otto

To cite this article: Jonathan Otto (2019) Precarious Participation: Assessing Inequality and Risk in the Carbon Credit Commodity Chain, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 109:1, 187-201, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2018.1490167

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1490167

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 20 Dec 2018.

Submit your article to this journal C

Article views: 78

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Precarious Participation: Assessing Inequality and Risk in the Carbon Credit Commodity Chain

## Jonathan Otto

Faculty of Arts, University of British Columbia

In this article, I examine the limitations of payment for ecosystem services (PES) carbon forestry programs in their ability to alleviate rural poverty and mitigate global climate change within the market context in which they operate. Turning to the Scolel ' te program in Mexico ' s southernmost state, Chiapas, I illustrate how, in 2008, international buyers of carbon credits produced in the region began to alter their sourcing decisions in response to shifting dynamics within the global economy -what I refer to here as market risk. I then use a commodity chains framework to (1) reveal how program managers in Scolel ' te sought to protect the program in the face of such risk by using their relative positions of power to govern how carbon credit producing farmers operated and (2) illustrate the implications of this market risk and the decisions of program managers for farmers participating in the program. I find that the governance decisions made by program managers in the face of market risk led to a series of unintended outcomes that included the dissolution of the social relations of production between program managers and carbon credit -producing farmers as well as the social relations within participating communities. As a result, farmers began to leave the program, abandoning their agroforestry plantings and limiting the full realization of the program ' s positive environmental and social outcomes in the region. Key Words: carbon forestry, carbon market, commodity chain, Mexico, risk.

我 于 本 文 中 检 视 生 态 系 统 服 务 （ PES ） 碳 森 林 计 画 的 付 费 , 在 其 所 施 行 的 市 场 脉 络 中 , 减 轻 乡 村 贫 穷 与 缓 和 全 球 气 候 变 迁 的 能 力 限 制 。 我 转 向 墨 西 哥 最 南 方 的 恰 帕 斯 州 中 推 行 的 斯 科 莱 特 （ Scolel ' te ） 计 画 , 阐 述 在 该 区 域 所 生 产 的 碳 信 用 的 国 际 买 家 , 为 何 开 始 转 变 其 源 头 的 决 策 , 以 回 应 全 球 经 济 中 的 转 变 动 态 --我 于 此 称 之为 市 场 风 险 。 我 接 着 运 用 商 品 鍊 的 架构来 （ 1 ） 揭 露 斯 科 莱 特 的 计 画 经 理 人 在 面 临 此 般 风 险 时 , 如 何 运 用 其 相 对 的 权 力 位 置 来 管 理 生 产 碳 信 用 的 农 夫如 何 运 作 , 以 寻 求 保 护 该计 画 ； 以 及 （ 2 ） 阐 述 此 般 市 场 风 险 以 及 计 画 经 理 人 的 决 策 对 参 与 至 该计 画 的 农 民 之 意 涵 。 我 发 现 计 画 经 理 人 在 面 临 市 场 风 险 时 的 治 理 决 策 , 导 致 一 系 列 非 计 画 中 的 结 果 , 包 含 计 画 经 理 人 和 生 产 碳 信 用 的 农 民 之 间 的 社 会 生 产 关 系 、 以 及参 与 该计 画 的 社 群 中 的 社 会 关 系 的 瓦 解 。 农 民 因 而 开 始 背 离 该计 画 , 放 弃 他们 的 农 业 森 林 种 植 , 并 限 制 了 该计 画 在 该 区 的 正 面 环 境 与 社 会 结 果 的 全 面 实 现 。 关 键 词 : 碳 森 林 , 碳 市 场 , 商 品 鍊 , 墨 西 哥 , 风 险 。

En este art  ı culo, examino las limitaciones de los programas de pago por servicios ecosist  emicos (PES) de carbono forestal, en lo que se refiere a su capacidad de aliviar la pobreza rural y mitigar el cambio clim  atico global dentro del contexto del mercado dentro del cual operan. Volviendo al programa de Scolel ' te en Chiapas, el estado m  as meridional de M  exico, ilustro c  omo, en 2008, los compradores internacionales de cr  editos de carbono producidos en la regi  on empezaron a alterar sus decisiones sobre fuentes en respuesta a la din  amica cambiante dentro de la econom  ı a global --a lo que yo me refiero aqu  ı como riesgo de mercado. Uso luego un marco de cadenas de mercader  ı as para (1) revelar el modo como los administradores del programa en Scolel ' te buscaron proteger el programa frente a tal riesgo usando sus posiciones relativas de poder para dictaminar el modo de operar de los agricultores productores de cr  editos de carbono; y para (2) ilustrar las implicaciones de este riesgo de mercado y las decisiones de los administradores frente a los agricultores que participaran en el programa. Encuentro que las decisiones de gobernanza tomadas por los administradores de programa frente al riesgo del mercado llevaron a una serie de resultados inesperados que incluyeron la disoluci  on de las relaciones sociales de producci  on entre los administradores de programa y los agricultores generadores de cr  editos de carbono, lo mismo que las relaciones sociales dentro de las comunidades participantes. El resultado fue que los agricultores empezaron a salirse del programa, abandonando sus plant  ı os agroforestales y limitando la cabal realizaci  on de los resultados ambientales

y sociales positivos del programa para la regi  on. Palabras clave: carbono forestal, cadena de mercader  ı as, mercado del carbono, M  exico, riesgo.

C arbon forestry represents one form of payment for ecosystem services (PES) initiatives designed to mitigate global climate change by reducing atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations. It consists of reforestation, afforestation, and forest preservation activities, which are carried out largely in developing countries and are intended to enhance and protect the capacity of forests to provide the ecosystem service of sequestering CO2 emissions. Carbon credits -certificates that verify the capture of CO2 through carbon forestry activities -are then sold via carbon markets to polluters, generally in developed countries, who are interested in offsetting their emissions. PES proponents suggest that positive social outcomes might also be achieved through carbon forestry, particularly in cases where the incomes of poor farmers working in PES initiatives are supplemented by revenue generated from the sale of carbon credits. Despite these claims, however, I argue in this article that uncertainty in the carbon credit economy and power inequalities within the carbon credit commodity chain could limit the realization of these positive environmental and social outcomes through carbon forestry.

In this article, I turn to the case of the Scolel ' te carbon forestry program in Mexico ' s southernmost state, Chiapas, to show how uncertainty in carbon markets challenges the long-term success of forest carbon projects on the ground. Originating in 1997, the Scolel ' te program -the name meaning tree that grows in the local Tzeltal language -has been praised within Mexico and the United States as a successful example of participatory carbon forestry. This is especially important in a state like Chiapas where development and conservation programs have been known more for their corruption and failure than their ability to engender positive change. Yet, my conversations with farmers from the state ' s western Sierra Madre region who were working in Scolel ' te tended to reveal deep frustrations with the program -a notable paradox that was not clear in the reports of the managing nongovernmental organization (NGO) or voiced by program proponents working for international development and conservation organizations in Mexico City and Washington, DC.

I explain farmer discontent within the program by linking it to trends within the broader carbon market in which Scolel ' te operates. Specifically, I use a commodity chains framework to highlight (1) the relational nature of shifting supply and demand dynamics within the carbon credit economy -what I refer to as market risk ; (2) the fact that program managers occupy relative positions of power within the carbon credit economy and how, in the face of market risk, they were able to act in ways that were designed to insulate the program from it; and (3) how their responses produced unintended outcomes such as distrust among farmers in Chiapas ' s Sierra Madre region. I also show how this distrust inspired farmers to terminate their participation in the program and abandon their planted agroforestry systems, thus diminishing the ability of the program to capture CO2 over the long term.

Hopkins and Wallerstein (1977) defined commodity chains as consisting of the broad set of interconnected actors, labor inputs, social relations, and raw materials that lead to the production of a consumable item. Inquiries centered on commodity chains in carbon forestry are limited (see Kelly and Schmitz [2016] for an exception), but work in geography and sociology has advanced studies of global commodity chains (GCCs; see Gereffi 1994, 1995; Gereffi and Korzeniewicz 1994), global value chains (GVCs; see Gereffi, Humphrey, and Sturgeon 2005; Ponte and Sturgeon 2014), and global production networks (GPNs; see Henderson et al. 2002; Coe et al. 2004; Franz and Hassler 2010). Taken together, this work, although diverse, recognizes that power relations are unequal among actors who are connected in the global economy through chain-like linkages and uses the idea of chain governance to explain how empowered organizations are able to influence the behaviors of their relatively weaker counterparts. In the case of the Scolel ' te program, this perspective explains why the decisions of carbon credit buyers in the United States and Western Europe had significant implications for actors in southern Mexico. Moreover, it clarifies how the decisions made by program managers in response to shifting buyer practices affected participating farmers, thus limiting the success of the program on the ground.

My intention is to use a commodity chains framework to analyze the Scolel ' te program in a way that, first, contributes to studies of risk in carbon forestry, which tend to focus less on market risk and on the on-the-ground experiences of carbon credit producers. Instead, they have largely examined (1) risk stemming from political uncertainties and from violence or corruption in countries where offset production occurs (Ben  ı tez et al. 2007); (2) the risk of reversal; that is, the inability of a carbon forestry program to capture CO2 over the long term due to environmental factors such as wildfires (see, e.g., Hurteau, Hungate, and Koch 2009; Valatin 2011; and (3) risk related to ' leakages ' in carbon forestry programs -instances where program activities (e.g., reforestation efforts by smallholders) have unintended consequences outside the project site (e.g., the deforestation of new plots of land by the same land-strapped farmers) and, as a result, fail to achieve a net positive reduction in CO2 concentrations.

Second, my goal is to respond to the call of McAfee and Shapiro (2010) for more research on the local experiences of broader transnational PES trends. I aim to do this by contributing to the work of many who examine the institutional complexities of market environmentalism (see, e.g., Mansfield 2004; Bakker 2005; Knox-Hayes 2010) and by building on existing studies of the negative local effects of carbon offset projects in Chiapas and elsewhere (see Beymer-Farris and Bassett 2012; Osborne 2013; Rocheleau 2015).

Data for this article were collected from August 2011 to August 2012 as part of a broader project funded by the Fulbright Foundation and the InterAmerican Foundation. I conducted participant observation and semistructured interviews with program managers from the small twenty-nine-member lead NGO, AMBIO. Specifically, I attended manager-led training meetings for carbon credit -producing farmers and accompanied managers on visits to participating communities where they addressed farmers ' questions about the program. These trips provided significant insight into the goals of program managers and the many factors that influenced their day-to-day decisions. Following participant observation with the NGO, I conducted one small-group discussion with two program directors and two program managers. I also carried out four separate interviews -one with the director of carbon credit sales and three with program directors. These conversations were designed to expand on specific points of interest revealed through participant observation such as the implications of market uncertainty for Scolel ' te and the program managers ' strategies for responding to it.

I also conducted participant observation with enrolled farmers in two communities, a method that was designed, initially, to gain the trust of program participants and to obtain insight into various dimensions of the on-the-ground experience of participating in carbon forestry. These facets included farmer involvement in the labor associated with establishing, maintaining, and monitoring agroforestry systems and the social implications of the program within farming communities. Although I also conducted more than twenty-five semistructured interviews with farmers on the same topics, participant observation provided a unique opportunity for me to openly reflect with farmers as we harvested coffee or hiked into the city for training meetings with the managing NGO.

Over the course of my twelve-month stay in Chiapas, I observed program managers as they responded to diminished demand for carbon credits produced in the state. In meetings with participating farmers, I listened as the managing NGO explained the decisions they had made to recruit farmers with the promise of future pay, as opposed to their standard practice of providing farmers with up-front payments for their work. As an outcome of these decisions, I heard farmers in the same meetings, and in conversations with family and friends at home, voice distrust about the program. I then listened as farmers in their communities eventually begin to discuss their intention to leave the program in the face of such distrust and to abandon their agroforestry systems.

This study suggests that market-based conservation programs might be limited in their ability to achieve their stated outcomes over the long term as demand for carbon credits produced in a particular location might fluctuate significantly depending on buyer motivations and broader economic factors. It also raises questions about how risk operates in carbon markets more generally, particularly in the context of the Paris Climate Accords, which includes REDD þ as a central aspect of its carbon capture efforts.

In what follows, I examine these issues in four parts. First, I provide a brief background of the

Figure 1. Map of Chiapas ' s five key regions. Map credit: Jeff Levy. Used previously in Otto (2016).

<!-- image -->

Scolel ' te program, illustrating its successful expansion across Chiapas over the past twenty years and providing a brief sketch of the market context in which it operates. Second, I outline how I understand market risk in carbon forestry and show how it emerges within voluntary carbon markets. Third, I show how the managing NGO responded to this risk in a way that was designed to insulate the organization and the program from its effects but that led to unintended consequences for relatively disempowered farmers. I then examine these consequences for farmers participating in Scolel ' te within Chiapas ' s Sierra Madre region by highlighting the erosion of social relations among farmers within participating communities and the evaporation of farmer interest in the program. Finally, I conclude by questioning the implications of market risk for carbon forestry programs around the world that depend on similar market constructs to achieve their environmental and social objectives.

## Context

The Scolel ' te program is a PES initiative designed to use the carbon forestry model to alleviate rural poverty and mitigate global climate change. Proponents of the Scolel ' te program measure its success by pointing out its long-standing presence in Chiapas and its steady expansion across the state since its foundation in 1997. Yet, its most recent expansion into the state ' s western Sierra Madre region -an effort that began in 2008 -was challenged by market uncertainty related to the 2008 global financial crisis and to shifting carbon credit buyer interests, challenges that are most visible

when viewed within the context of the Scolel ' te program ' s history in Chiapas and the nature of the carbon market context in which the program operates.

The managing NGO ' s efforts to actively expand the Scolel ' te program from the Central Highlands region to the eastern Lacand  on and western Sierra Madre regions since its foundation have allowed it to incorporate large numbers of communities and farmers into its carbon forestry work. According to Brown and Corbera (2003), from 1998 to 2003 the managing NGO expanded Scolel ' te from forty-seven participating farmers in six communities located in Chiapas ' s Central Highlands region to more than 450 farmers in twenty communities in the Central Highlands and eastern Lacand  on regions of the state, including some in the neighboring state of Oaxaca. As a result of further increases in program size, participation expanded to more than 650 farmers in twenty-three communities by 2005 (Quechulpa Montalvo, Esquivel Baz  an, and Fournier 2011). In 2008, the managing NGO began to expand the program into the state ' s western Sierra Madre region (see Figure 1) and incorporated approximately 100 farmers from eight communities (Esquivel Baz  an and Quechulpa Montalvo 2008). The following year featured the incorporation of farmers from an additional thirteen communities, and Esquivel Baz  an and Quechulpa Montalvo (2010) noted that as of 2010, AMBIO had expanded the program to include more than 2,400 farmers in Chiapas and Oaxaca.

The Scolel ' te program plays an important role in the Sierra Madre region and in Chiapas more generally, providing a potential means for protecting and expanding the state ' s existing natural wealth and for generating much-needed income for farmers living in persistent conditions of poverty. Chiapas has long been celebrated for its natural resources, which, originally exploited by Spanish colonial actors, have more recently been used to fuel industrial growth in the central and northern regions of the country. 1 Yet, despite these resources, Chiapas ' s population is one of the poorest in Mexico, with poverty and illiteracy rates at significantly higher levels than the national average. In 2014, 76 percent of the state population (over 3.9 million people) lived in poverty, 32 percent of whom (more than 1.6 million people) lived in extreme poverty (Consejo Nacional de Evaluaci  on de la Pol  ı tica de Desarrollo Social [CONEVAL] 2014). In this context, revenue generated from the Scolel ' te program stands to provide an important supplement to meager farmer incomes.

Compensation provided to farmers for their agroforestry labor in Scolel ' te is generated through the sale of carbon credits to buyers in international voluntary carbon markets. These markets exist in parallel to compliance carbon markets, which were designed originally to allow actors within signatory countries to the Kyoto Protocol to meet their CO2 reductions targets by purchasing carbon credits. Whereas participation in the latter is mandated by a legal framework, involvement in the former is voluntary and includes actors in nonsignatory countries to the Kyoto Protocol.

The majority of the carbon credits produced in Scolel ' te -also known as Plan Vivo Certificates because of the Plan Vivo Standard under which program offset production activities are organized -have been sold to private-sector actors (Vargas Guill  en et al. 2011). Moreover, these transactions have occurred largely ' over the counter ' (OTC) with wholesalers. 2 The purchase of Plan Vivo Certificates is motivated by the concerns of corporate buyers -located largely in the Global North and, to some extent, in Mexico -to achieve their corporate social responsibility (CSR) objectives. These involve demonstrating their environmental and social responsibility to their clientele. Long-standing buyers have included, for instance, the European automobile racing organization Federation Internationale de l ' Automobile (FIA) and the Mexican petroleum company Petr  oleos Mexicanos (PEMEX; Cooperativa AMBIO Sociedad Civil de Responsabilidad Limitada [SC de RL] 2012), whose activities are responsible for significant CO2 emissions. Looking to PetersStanley and Yin (2013), the exchanges linked to the Scolel ' te program and the motivations that underlie them are consistent with the broader voluntary carbon market context where the majority of carbon credits are traded OTC and where, in 2012, CSR concerns motivated the majority (34 percent) of private-sector purchases. 3

Plan Vivo Certificates produced in the Scolel ' te program are sold through a process of forward purchases wherein voluntary buyers acquire carbon credits prior to their production (Vargas Guill  en et al. 2011). Under this model, Scolel ' te program managers are able to obtain the capital needed to fund program expansion across Chiapas, to initiate carbon

Table 1. Scolel ' te carbon credit sales and global VER sales, 2006 -2012

|   Year |   Total Plan Vivo certificate sales a | Total VER sales b   |
|--------|---------------------------------------|---------------------|
|   2006 |                                77,108 | 32 million          |
|   2007 |                                19,829 | 73 million          |
|   2008 |                                40,604 | 135 million         |
|   2009 |                                 6,069 | 107 million         |
|   2010 |                                28,889 | 131 million         |
|   2011 |                                 1,380 | 97 million          |
|   2012 |                                 9,015 | 101 million         |

Note:

VER ¼ verified emissions reductions.

a Data obtained from Cooperativa AMBIO SC de RL (2014).

b Data obtained from Peters-Stanley and Yin (2013).

capture activities, and to compensate farmers early on in the production process to encourage their ongoing participation. 4 Their capacity to do so -and, by extension, to achieve their goals of poverty alleviation and conservation -however, depends on their ability to establish durable relationships with buyers of carbon credits. Yet, such relationships are less than reliable given that buyers are able to flexibly change their sourcing patterns in response to any number of circumstances, thus posing a degree of market risk for program managers that could limit their expansionary efforts.

## Market Risk in the Carbon Credit Commodity Chain

In 2012, Scolel ' te program managers indicated in interviews and in their 2011 -2012 annual report their concerns about the fact that their ability to sell Plan Vivo Certificates had been in decline since 2009 (see Cooperativa AMBIO SC de RL 2012). This, they suggested, was due to the decisions of participants in voluntary markets to end or shift their purchasing practices in light of broader economic circumstances. The primary factor influencing these decisions was the 2008 global financial crisis that had curtailed corporate interest in sustainability initiatives (see Esquivel Baz  an and Quechulpa Montalvo 2010). Program managers also felt, though, that international buyers had begun to source carbon credits from other parts of the world such as South America and sub-Saharan Africa rather than Chiapas to satisfy their evolving CSR needs. Such shifts in buyer interests are not unique to voluntary markets and can also be seen in compliance market constructs where buyer sourcing decisions have shifted to mitigate the risk of unreliable carbon offset supply (Kossoy and Ambrosi 2010). Yet, although buyers might frame their decisions in terms of risk mitigation, the Scolel ' te program illustrates that the unpredictability of their behaviors represents a source of risk for other actors along the commodity chain.

Program managers pointed out that the priorities of some corporate and individual actors participating in voluntary markets had begun to change following the 2008 financial crisis. Specifically, they noted that these buyers had become less concerned with climate change mitigation in the face of potential economic catastrophe and had begun to reduce their purchases of Plan Vivo Certificates (see Esquivel Baz  an and Quechulpa Montalvo 2010). Globally, this was reflected in the fact that in 2008 the volume of offsets transacted in voluntary markets totaled a record MtCO2e 135 million (see Table 1) as voluntary market participation continued its rise from previous years, only to fall to MtCO2e 107 million in 2009 (Peters-Stanley and Yin 2013). Although 2010 showed a strong rebound in voluntary carbon markets, total sales stayed low, falling back to MtCO2e 97 million and MtCO2e 101 million in 2011 and 2012, respectively (PetersStanley and Yin 2013). Compliance markets also experienced diminished transactions in the face of a contracting economic landscape across the European Union as countries ' needs for offsets fell due to lower CO2 emissions (Kossoy and Ambrosi 2010). Yet, in the case of the Scolel ' te program, the managing NGO also perceived a second factor influencing buyer decisions.

Traditionally, buyers of Plan Vivo Certificates produced in Chiapas have tended to find the product to be capable of satisfying their CSR objectives given that the carbon credits are designed to alleviate rural poverty in the state and mitigate global climate change -issues that have historically aligned with their clientele ' s sustainability concerns. Scolel ' te program managers suggested in interviews, however, that as consumers have become increasingly aware of the environmental and social implications of their consumption in recent years, corporate actors have sought to respond by ramping up their CSR programs by purchasing carbon credits that are increasingly green in nature; that is, carbon credits that respond to more iconic and, therefore, marketable environmental

and social issues. Moreover, the same managers argued that in practice this has meant that buyers have begun to source carbon credits from programs focused on protecting biodiversity in the Brazilian Amazon or alleviating poverty in sub-Saharan Africa, regions symbolized, respectively, by their biodiversity and poverty, to better market their sustainability efforts to their clientele. This, program managers argued, would be more difficult to achieve in a state like Chiapas that is comparatively less familiar to international consumers.

Although this second point was not highlighted in the literature as particularly relevant to shifting buyer decisions, the perception among program managers that this might have been the case was exasperating. Frustrated, one manager argued, ' What they [carbon offset purchasers] don ' t realize is that we have jungles, and we have poverty '-frustrations that can be explained when looking at the diminished Plan Vivo Certificate sales (see Table 1).

The presence of the market risks that emerged as buyers of carbon credits began to alter their sourcing decisions is belied by the claims made by organizations such as the Plan Vivo Foundation and the Gold Standard, which are responsible for creating the standards around which offset projects are structured. After noting that Plan Vivo projects ' [put] money into the pockets of poor farmers and community groups like farmer cooperatives, women ' s groups and community trust funds, ' the Plan Vivo Foundation continues by arguing on its Web site that ' Plan Vivo is a tried and tested system ' and that ' risk management is built into every stage ' (Plan Vivo Foundation 2018). The Gold Standard also notes on its Web site that potential investors in carbon forestry programs might ' de-risk their investments [in carbon forestry] as a result of the standard ' s financial, social and environmental safeguards and stakeholder engagement ' (The Gold Standard 2018). Comments such as these that present carbon offset projects as ' risk free ' are rooted in a limited consideration of risk in carbon forestry -that is, only as it relates to buyers of carbon offsets -and fail to take into account other types of risk that might affect managers of carbon forestry programs and producers of carbon credits.

Despite the claims of the certifying organizations, Goldstein and Ruef (2016) indicated in the 2016 Forest Trends State of Forest Carbon Finance report that even in the context of relative global economic stability and growing interest among corporate actors in forest-based sustainability programs, carbon offset transactions in voluntary markets might remain low. They showed, specifically, that in 2015, as the global economic recovery was well underway, ' [the] trading of voluntary forest-carbon offsets fell twenty-three percent in volume and thirty-one percent in market value as average prices dropped from $5.4/tonne in 2014 to $4.9/tonne, ' indicating the persistence of market risk for producers of carbon offsets (Goldstein and Ruef 2016, 7). For the Scolel ' te program, this risk is further compounded by the fact that most of the offsets sold in voluntary markets are not related to forest carbon activities but instead represent wind, biomass, and hydro activities, among others. In 2010, for instance, forest carbon projects only represented 40 percent of total offset sales in voluntary markets (Peters-Stanley et al. 2011), whereas in 2015 the same category comprised 29 percent of total sales (Hamrick and Goldstein 2016). The fact that forestry activities represent only a fraction of the market share magnifies the effects of shifting buyer interest in Plan Vivo Certificates produced in Chiapas as well as the challenges of generating new buyer demand.

Buyer shifts in their sourcing patterns were facilitated by their privileged position in the carbon credit commodity chain. Their decisions did not present a form of risk for them as it did for program managers or carbon credit producing farmers but was, instead, an advantage that allowed them to flexibly pursue their own interests. Some have framed the privilege of empowered actors in the carbon credit economy as carbon colonialism, a term that refers to the fact that polluters in the Global North are able to externalize the responsibility of mitigating global climate change and the risks of doing so onto actors in the Global South who, comparatively, contribute minimally to atmospheric CO2 concentrations and who have a diminished ability to respond to economic uncertainty in their own lives (see Bumpus and Liverman 2011). Although this perspective is useful for describing North -South inequalities within the carbon credit economy, it does not explain inequalities among actors within the Global South such as those emerging between program managers and carbon credit -producing farmers, the first of which was better positioned to secure its own best interests in the face of shifting buyer demand, often at the expense of the latter. In

the next section I turn to the concept of governance discussed within commodity chains literature to illustrate the power dynamics that inhered within the responses of program managers to growing market risk and to analyze its implications for participating farmers.

## Power Inequalities in the Carbon Credit Commodity Chain

As Scolel ' te clients began to flee, program managers responded with a mix of strategies aimed at reacting to unpredictable market conditions while ensuring their own well-being. These strategies involved the creation of a Fondo Provisional de Carbono (Provisional Carbon Fund) in 2010, the adjustment of recruitment procedures aimed at governing how newly enrolled farmers participated in the program, and the establishment of new labor relations with one class of laborers in Scolel ' te, extension agents, on whom program managers depend for a variety of tasks central to the success of the program. The ability of program managers to take these actions in response to realized market risk stemmed from their position of power in the carbon credit commodity chain relative to offset producing farmers.

In his work on GCCs, Gereffi (1994) discussed power inequalities in commodity chains in terms of chain governance -the ability of relatively empowered actors -what he referred to as ' lead actors '-to coordinate how others in the commodity chain operate. Gereffi argued that depending on how governance objectives were pursued within a commodity chain, it could be either buyer driven -that is, governed largely by the decisions of buyers -or producer driven, influenced largely by the governance behaviors of producers. This dualism has been critiqued by Raikes, Jensen, and Ponte (2000), who argued that it is too simplistic and ' ignores the different degrees and sorts of power or powerlessness to be found along the length of a chain ' (19). They suggested, instead, that power can accumulate at many points and among many actors in ways that create drivers at multiple nodes within commodity chains, or even outside commodity chains (e.g., certification boards and governments), all of which affect commodity chains differently. In the case of the Scolel ' te program, the use of a simple buyer-driven framework to explain the governance decisions of buyers in the carbon credit commodity chain would ignore the relative degrees of power among program managers and carbon credit producing farmers in Chiapas and how that power was leveraged in the face of market risk.

Research on commodity chains has also examined how risk influences chain governance and has sought to define risk in many ways (see, e.g., Humphrey and Schmitz 2000, 2001, 2002; Gibbon 2001; Gereffi and Luo 2015). Gereffi and Luo (2015), for instance, defined risk merely as the ' possibility of loss, ' whereas others such as Lessard (2013) have identified it in terms of sources of risk, risk events or outcomes (i.e., the result of realized risk), and risk consequences. This work, though, tends to focus less on the issue of market risk, which is more commonly analyzed within studies of specific commodity markets (see Frank 2004; Bacon 2005; and Eakin, Tucker, and Castellanos [2006], for instance, who wrote about market risk in the 1990 ' s ' coffee crisis ' ). This work highlights the relational aspects of market risk and illustrates how one actor ' s ability to respond to market risk depends on their relationship to other actors, including public institutions (Eakin, Tucker, and Castellanos 2006) and alternative market structures like Fair Trade (Bacon 2005). Yet, even this literature gives less attention to two issues that are central to this article: how (1) market risk operates within markets for carbon credits and (2) power dynamics lead to the materialization of such risk and facilitate or constrain responses to it. By using a commodity chains lens to examine market risk in the Scolel ' te program, the implications of market risk and the power dynamics that relate to it become much more visible.

Although demand for Plan Vivo Certificates produced in Chiapas had begun to decline since 2008, Scolel ' te program managers continued to enroll new farmers from the Sierra Madre region. This was due to two factors: (1) As the Scolel ' te program had grown in popularity in the region prior to the disappearance of carbon credit buyers, additional farmers began to petition the managing NGO to join, and (2) although program managers needed to respond to diminished carbon credit sales, they always had to be prepared for new demand to suddenly appear. As one program manager put it:

You have to have producers [farmers] that carry out [production] activities independent of whether or not you have demand … because imagine that a buyer

comes and says that he wants 100,000 tons [of sequestered carbon] but we have not carried out production activities … we would not be able to fulfill this demand. This is why we have to have a reserve of carbon credits. Obviously, what we have [the production activities we continue to carry out] is apart from whether or not we are currently selling carbon credits … because if they ask us, if they demand carbon credits, and we don ' t have production activities in progress, then we don ' t have the capacity to sell.

As production activities continued to expand despite diminished demand, though, program managers began to employ certain tactics designed to insulate the program from the effects of shifting buyer decisions.

One strategy employed by program managers was to create a Fondo Privisional de Carbono (Provisional Carbon Fund) in 2010. According to Vargas Guill  en et al. (2011), the Fondo was established to fill the financial void created by diminished forward sales of carbon credits that were needed to support program activities in new communities and to compensate new enrollees for their work. Money for the Fondo originated from a series of donations given to AMBIO by several foundations and NGOs, and was designed to operate as a revolving fund that could assist with paying for initial program activities in new communities and with new participants (Vargas Guill  en et al. 2011). The Fondo , then, could be reestablished by future sales of newly produced carbon credits once demand for Plan Vivo Certificates returned and offset buyers could be located. As demand for Plan Vivo Certificates continued to decline, however, additional measures were pursued -measures that involved readjusting participant enrollment procedures and the establishment of new labor relations with farmers working as extension agents.

During the early stages of the expansion, program managers generally waited to recruit farmers until forward purchase agreements had been made with buyers of Plan Vivo Certificates, thus guaranteeing that newly enrolled farmers would be compensated for their work and providing a risk-sharing mechanism among buyers and producers of carbon credits. As new contracts with buyers became scarce, however, program managers adopted a new strategy that involved storing the carbon credits produced by new participants in a fondo de reserva (a reserve fund) where they would be held until contracts with new buyers could be established and they could be

Figure 2. Land parcel monitoring. Photo by author.

<!-- image -->

offloaded. In turn, program managers explained to the new recruits that they would not be compensated for their work in the same immediate fashion as their counterparts who had entered the program during the initial stages of expansion into the region but instead would have to wait for the reserve of carbon credits to be sold before receiving their payments.

By enrolling farmers under the promise of future pay and by creating a fondo de reserva of carbon credits, program managers were able to develop a degree of flexibility that allowed them to respond to unpredictable and shifting market conditions. This flexibility rested on the ability of program managers to govern how newly enrolled farmers were compensated for their work in Scolel ' te, though, and to continue to extract value out of farmer labor while delaying compensation for their work. This, however, was not the only governance strategy aimed at restructuring farmer compensation.

A third governance strategy employed by program managers involved attempts to extract value out of one type of worker enrolled in Scolel ' te -community extension agents -while reducing compensation for their work. 5 The work of community extension agents revolves around two key sets of activities: (1) carrying out land parcel monitoring within their communities to ensure that planted trees are growing and CO2 is captured and (2) serving as liaisons between program managers and their communities. This work is central to the Scolel ' te program given the fact that the managing NGO consists only of around thirty employees and that, given limited personnel, it is not always able to maintain a strong

presence in each of the communities where farmers are producing Plan Vivo Certificates. Yet, whereas community extension agents receive monetary compensation for the first type of work, the second is unpaid. Thus, it was with the first that program managers sought to implement governance measures aimed at altering farmer compensation.

Monitoring work is completed on a yearly basis for the first five years of a given agroforestry system and then again in Year 8 to ensure tree health and to verify the capture of CO2 (Vargas Guill  en et al. 2011). Land parcel monitoring is a labor-intensive process for the extension agent. The time required to monitor a given plot of land varies, depending on its distance from the agent ' s home, the nature of the terrain, and the size of the parcel of land. According to conversations with community extension agents in three communities, the average labor time required in the Sierra Madre region to monitor every plot in a given community is thirteen days per year. Monitoring activities involve hiking through mountainous land to locate each tree planted within the established agroforestry systems. By hiking with farmers through their fields to carry out monitoring activities, it became clear that significant physical labor is required of the community extension agents, who must divert time from work in their own fields to monitor land parcels (see Figure 2).

The governance decisions pursued by program managers in relation to extension agent work were most visible in the changing pay structures tied to their monitoring labor. As of 2012, extension agents reported being paid around Ps $90 (US$4.50) per day to fulfill monitoring activities, which, as one extension agent noted in an interview, was a reduction from original payments of Ps $100 (US$5.00) per day in 2011. This was verified by program managers who, when questioned, admitted that extension agents and producers of carbon credits felt the impacts of shifting market conditions to the greatest extent.

The governance decisions pursued by program managers provided important means by which local PES activities (e.g., the enrollment of farmers in Scolel ' te, the production of Plan Vivo Certificates, and the expansion of the program into the Sierra Madre region) could continue without a hitch despite changing global market conditions. Importantly, the ability of the program managers to effectively use these means to mitigate the effects of shifting buyer interests is reflective of their empowered position within the commodity chain compared to farmers who had little influence in program design and budgeting decisions. The risk mitigation strategies were especially significant for newly enrolled farmers who anticipated payment for their work and who became distrustful of the program when those payments were delayed. Additionally, the governance decisions of program managers had important impacts for community extension agents whose relatively close relationship to program managers made them the target of rumors as discontented farmers began to suspect that corruption might have been the cause for their late payments.

## Effects of Risk Mitigation Strategies for Carbon Credit Producing Farmers

Program managers went to great lengths to explain the shifting carbon market context to carbon credit -producing farmers, including the managerial response to it that had created a scenario of uneven payment schedules for farmers who had enrolled in the program on a conditional basis (and were awaiting delayed payments) and for those who had joined at an earlier date (and had been paid with income generated through forward purchase agreements). They explained these factors during initial enrollment activities with new participants and repeated them to community extension agents at biannual training meetings. Yet, despite the efforts of the program managers, social relations among participating farmers became infused with distrust and tension as newly enrolled farmers continued to question what had happened to their compensation. This led to the unraveling of the social relations among participating farmers as well as the social relations of production between them and the managing NGO. As a result, farmers began to leave the program and to abandon their established agroforestry systems, thus diminishing the ability of the carbon forestry program to achieve its stated environmental goals of CO2 capture. Moreover, it meant that poor farmers who had been designated by program proponents as the intended beneficiaries of the revenue generated from carbon credit sales had begun to abandon their participation while having received only partial compensation for their work.

Farmer distrust in manager explanations for the late payments was rooted in their inability to perceive the market risk related to carbon credits, which led them to contextualize the delayed payments within the context of their past experiences with corrupt and unsuccessful development and conservation programs. Farmers in the Sierra Madre region, whose key income-earning activities revolve around the production and limited sale of agricultural goods such as corn, beans, and coffee, have a keen understanding of market risk -especially in this region where the coffee crisis in the 1990s had significant implications (see Frank 2004; Bacon 2005; Eakin, Tucker, and Castellanos 2006). In the context of Scolel ' te, however, an awareness of market risk among farmers was obscured by the atypical nature of the carbon credit commodity and a related lack of understanding regarding the origin of the payments that participants hoped to receive for their work.

Unlike traditional agricultural commodities whose physical characteristics are clear, the carbon credit -sequestered CO2 -is a commodity that was unevenly understood by farmers in the region. Don Jorge, one farmer in the Sierra Madre region and a friend of the extension agent in his community, showed, for instance, a relatively clear understanding of the carbon credit commodity, saying,

I think the [carbon] credit, according to the course they [program managers] gave us … we can ' t see it. It ' s like the wind they say. We can ' t see the wind but we know it is there when the trees move.

Others, such as Jaime, admitted, however, that the concept of a carbon credit was quite vague, saying,

Well, I don ' t understand it [the concept of the carbon credit] very well. All I know is they come here and measure our trees to see if they are growing and to see what kind of land we have.

In the end, within the two communities in the Sierra Madre region where this research was conducted, only 25 percent of interviewed farmers participating in the Scolel ' te program felt confident in their ability to explain the nature of a carbon credit commodity. In this context, farmers were left in disbelief as Scolel ' te program managers explained the delayed compensation for their work in terms of shifting demand for Plan Vivo Certificates.

In this context, farmers enrolled on a conditional basis did not interpret the delayed payments in terms of market risk but, instead, suspected that corruption was to blame -a historically important factor contributing to the demise of past government- or NGOled development and conservation programs. In Chiapas, such skepticism is common and the sources of such sentiments are diverse. Yet, in the central and northern portions of the Sierra Madre region, the causes of distrust are specifically linked to the long-standing inability of outside nongovernmental and governmental actors to deliver on the promises often accompanying development and conservation programs and to the corruption that has stymied such initiatives (see Fox and Haight 2010).

As program participants began to turn to past experiences to explain the delayed payments, rumors surfaced about who might be responsible for the lack of compensation. Often, the targets of such rumors included those who were closest to the program; that is, the community extension agents and the program managers. As I sat with one carbon credit producer, Alejandro, on the porch outside his home, he spoke about the extension agent in his community, Ismael, saying:

You know, when Ismael monitors Don Jorge ' s plot of land, he inflates the number of trees he has planted so that he can receive more money. Either that, or he allows Don Jorge to plant his trees with less spacing between each one so that he can plant more on each hectare of land. That is the only explanation I have for why Don Jorge makes more money per hectare than anyone else. I have done the calculations and it doesn ' t make sense in any other way. They work together, you know.

Although Alejandro did not explicitly link Ismael to the late payments, he did make an important connection between the community extension agent and presumptions of corruption, assumptions that facilitated ideas that he might be the reason for why the payments had not arrived.

Given their elevated position within the Scolel ' te program, community extension agents were often uniquely exposed to farmer dissatisfaction as compared to program managers, whose offices are located in San Cristobal de las Casas, a nearly five-hour drive from the Sierra Madre region. Such rumors proved toxic to the image of the community extension agents who became inextricably linked to presumptions of corruption often associated with the delayed payments. While socializing with friends and neighbors each evening, it became clear how in rural

communities of 300 to 500 people, rumors had spread quickly and tainted the image of the community extension agent in the eyes of some participants.

In talking with Ismael, he noted that because of the challenges associated with growing farmer distrust toward the program, life for him had become more complicated. Frustrated, he said:

Every time I leave the house someone wants to know where their money is and why the payments are late. It is hard because I do not know, and I do not have an answer for them.

In a separate interview, Ismael repeated these sentiments, saying:

The [PES] project has not gone well. We have not received the money we are owed. When I leave the house, people ask me, ' Where is our money? ' and ' What have you done with our money? ' Some accuse me of having stolen it, and they won ' t stop asking about it. I prefer not to leave my house because I do not want to answer their questions anymore. It is easier to stay home.

Ismael ' s choice to isolate himself from the continuous complaints and accusations tied to late payments allowed him to find some respite from the frustration of fellow community members. It also complicated his status, however, by serving only to fuel rumors that had begun to emerge about him. This became clear as Alejandro wrapped up his complaints of the community extension agent by asking:

Why do you think Ismael sits in his home all day and never leaves his house? When he leaves, why does he only go to Don Jorge ' s home?

Another community extension agent from a second community, Sergio, confirmed Ismael ' s experience, saying:

The people become impatient and upset when the payments are late. Before I left for the last meeting in San Crist  obal, they [fellow participants in Scolel ' te] requested me to ask AMBIO about the payments. When I returned, they asked, ' So what? ' I explained to them that AMBIO must find new buyers. The situation is difficult. They [the farmers] want to abandon the project and some have already neglected their parcels.

As an outcome of these tensions and their reduced payments for monitoring work, the community extension agents began to join the ranks of those who were questioning their future participation in the program. Ismael admitted reluctantly that ' this will be my last year with the project. '

The negative outcomes for participating farmers, including extension agents, were principally social in nature, even though a certain financial loss accompanied the lack of payments and the resulting decision to ultimately leave the program. This is because farmers were paid relatively little for their work and were promised compensation over a series of five payments spread across eight years, with payments in Years 1, 2, 3, 5, and 8 of the established agroforestry system, a schedule that corresponded with the monitoring activities for each plot of land (Vargas Guill  en et al. 2011). That said, although the money earned by participating farmers was not much (both farmers and program managers did not provide specific payment amounts), many noted that the peque ~ no apoyo (small support) allowed them to purchase certain items that would otherwise be difficult to come by, including luxury items such as sugar or meat. Others noted that the money was useful for purchasing lightbulbs, machetes, boots, and other items needed for work around the house and in the fields. Still, for some it was a source of money from which one could draw to finance trips into the city to purchase groceries, visit family, go to the doctor, or tend to legal issues. In essence, participation in the project provided families with discretionary income that is a rare luxury in poor farming communities.

In their 2011 -2012 annual report, Scolel ' te program managers admitted that uncertainties in the voluntary carbon market complicated their efforts in the Sierra Madre region, noting, ' This aspect is indeed a real challenge as Scolel ' te cannot expand if the level of sales is not high enough ' (Cooperativa AMBIO SC de RL 2012, 7). They also suggested that poor communication between program managers, extension agents, and participating farmers complicated certain aspects of the program, including the implementation of effective land parcel monitoring activities. AMBIO blamed the lack of communication largely on the barriers posed by poor road infrastructure in the rural state, saying, ' Currently miscommunication often occurs due to the fact that the programme has expanded to different regions of the State and communities are very often situated in marginalized area so communication may be complicated to establish and to maintain adequately ' (Cooperativa AMBIO SC de RL 2012, 8). Although

this is an important factor, it is also clear that the inability of farmers to perceive market risk in the carbon credit economy only exacerbated the challenge as farmer frustrations grew.

## Conclusion

In spring 2012, AMBIO mentioned briefly in their annual report that they had chosen to ' stop promoting the program to new producers in the community [in the Sierra Madre region] until the carbon credits in the fondo de reserva are sold and until new forward sale orders are received ' (Cooperativa AMBIO SC de RL 2012, 15). The comment was presented as an afterthought in a broader discussion about Plan Vivo Certificate sales from 2011 and 2012 and was not contextualized (with the exception of a brief mention of the voluntary carbon market challenges eight pages earlier in the forty-one-page report). Yet, despite the fact that the mention was buried in the organization ' s 2012 annual report, its significance is undeniable not least because it demonstrates the limitations of marketbased PES programs to mitigate global climate change in the face of shifting buyer behaviors -an accepted attribute of commercial markets. This is especially true when managing actors like AMBIO have limited resources with which to protect the program, while also empowering carbon credit producing farmers whose ongoing labor is critical to the success of a PES initiative. As the case of the Scolel ' te program shows, program managers were left with few options and had no choice but to rely on their relative position of power to try to insulate the program from the effects of shifting buying patterns -decisions that had damaging unforeseen consequences for the program.

In their 2012 Annual Report, program managers noted their involvement in new initiatives related to REDD þ and sustainable grazing programs, their collaboration with organizations like Mexico ' s Programme for Climate Change Adaptation (PROACC), the National Commission of Protected Natural Area (CONANP), and their new alliances with organizations in the Sierra Madre and area universities. These opportunities provided program managers with access to revenue and reaffirmed the managing NGO ' s organizational relevance despite reduced promotional activities for Scolel ' te in the Sierra Madre region. Such options to secure their well-being, however, were not available to many farmers whose social and professional lives consisted of many fewer contacts and who were, unlike program managers, left with the only option of waiting for market conditions to change so that they could be compensated for their work.

In the end, although the causes for the lack of program success differed from past experiences, the outcomes were the same. Instead of corruption, it was market uncertainty that had altered the ability of the managing NGO to deliver on its promises. Although honest attempts were made by program managers to explain the situation to program participants, such efforts were limited by the unclear nature of the carbon credit commodity and were haunted by farmers ' past experiences with development and conservation programs in their communities.

This study suggests that market-based conservation programs might be limited in their ability to deliver the social and environmental outcomes with which they are often associated. It also raises questions about how risk operates in carbon markets more generally, particularly in the context of the Paris Climate Accords, which includes REDD þ as a central aspect of its carbon capture efforts, and the ability of such efforts to successfully mitigate global climate change in the long term. Shifting buyer interests constitute the norm in commercial markets, and the ability of producers to respond to changing demand requires significant resources. This is especially true for PES programs like Scolel ' te that are centered on working with smallholders, as doing so often requires greater financial and other resources needed to achieve the large-scale production of carbon offsets by organizing the productive activities of many landholders and responding to market risk. The challenges that program managers such as those working in pro-poor programs like Scolel ' te face in responding to market risk beg the question of whether the social benefits of carbon forestry programs might effectively be made available to poor smallholders who are in particular need of financial support.

## Notes

1. In 1990, for instance, Chiapas, with only 3 percent of Mexico ' s population, accounted for the production of 54 percent of the country ' s hydroelectric power and over 10 percent of its corn production (Collier and Quaratiello 1999).

2. Over the counter (OTC) refers to those transactions realized outside of a formal exchange. Although AMBIO has attempted to facilitate the trading of carbon credits to individuals via their Web site, the overwhelming majority of carbon credit sales are to wholesalers via OTC markets given AMBIO ' s limited organizational resources required to locate and establish relationships with diverse individual buyers such as government offices or small corporations.
3. Peters-Stanley and Yin (2013) also noted that CSRinspired buyers are accompanied in voluntary markets by precompliance buyers who participate either to (a) buy carbon offsets that can be stored for a perceived future compliance need or (b) sell at a higher price to organizations that might face a future compliance requirement.
4. Hawkins et al. (2010) noted that when buyers acquire carbon offsets through forward purchase agreements, they are often assuming a certain degree of risk tied to the production process, including, for instance, the risk that due to factors such as fire, or even unpredictable social or political factors, the carbon credit might not, in the end, be produced. For producers of carbon credits and managers of carbon forestry programs, this method of forward purchases provides a means of sharing the risk burden tied to production activities. Hawkins et al. (2010) noted, however, that buyers are often compensated for taking on this risk in the form of having to pay less for the carbon credits they acquire.
5. Each community participating in the Scolel ' te program elects one community extension agent -referred to as t  ecnicos comunitarios -to represent their community to the managing NGO. Additionally, each region where the program is present has a regional extension agent -referred to as t  ecnicos regionales .

## References

- Bacon, C. 2005. Confronting the coffee crisis: Can fair trade, organic, and specialty coffees reduce small-scale farmer vulnerability in northern Nicaragua? World Development 33 (3):497 -511.
- Bakker, K. 2005. Neoliberalizing nature? Market environmentalism in water supply in England and Wales. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95 (3):542 -65.
- Ben  ı tez, P. C., I. McCallum, M. Obersteiner, and Y. Yamagata. 2007. Global potential for carbon sequestration: Geographical distribution, country risk and policy implications. Ecological Economics 60 (3):572 -83.
- Beymer-Farris, B. A., and T. J. Bassett. 2012. The REDD menace: Resurgent protectionism in Tanzania ' s mangrove forests. Global Environmental Change 22 (2):332 -41.
- Brown, K., and E. Corbera. 2003. Exploring equity and sustainability in the new carbon economy. Climate Policy 3 (Suppl. 1):S41 -S56.
- Bumpus, A. G., and D. M. Liverman. 2011. Carbon colonialism? Offsets, greenhouse gas reductions, and sustainable development. In Global political ecology , ed.
- R. Peet, P. Robbins, and M. Watts, 203 -24. London and New York: Routledge.
- Coe, N. M., M. Hess, H. Wai-Chung Yeung, P. Dicken, and J. Henderson. 2004. Globalizing regional development: A global production networks perspective. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 29 (4):468 -84.
- Collier, G. A., and E. L. Quaratiello. 1999. Basta!: Land and the Zapatista rebellion in Chiapas . Oakland, CA: Food First Books.
- Consejo Nacional de Evaluaci  on de la Pol  ı tica de Desarrollo Social (CONEVAL). 2014. Porcentaje, numero de personas y carencias promedio por indicador de pobreaza: Chiapas 2014 [Percent, number of people and average scarcity levels for various poverty indicators: Chiapas 2014]. Mexico City, Mexico: Consejo Nacional de Evaluaci  on de la Pol  ı tica de Desarrollo Social.
- Cooperativa AMBIO Sociedad Civil de Responsabilidad Limitada [SC de RL]. 2012. Annual report reporting period: March 2011 to March 2012: The Scolel ' te Programme . San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.
- ---2014. Annual report reporting period: March 2013 to March 2014: The Scolel ' te Programme . San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.
- Eakin, H., C. Tucker, and E. Castellanos. 2006. Responding to the coffee crisis: A pilot study of farmers ' adaptations in Mexico, Guatemala and Honduras. The Geographical Journal 172 (2):156 -71.
- Esquivel Baz  an, E., and S. Quechulpa Montalvo. 2008. Scolel ' te report 2008 . San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.
- ---. 2010. Scolel ' te programme plan vivo annual report 2009 . San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.
- Fox, J., and L. Haight. 2010. Subsidios para la desigualdad: Las pol  ı ticas p  ublicas del ma  ı z en M  exico a partir del libre comercio [Subsidies for inequality: The public politics of corn in Mexico since the beginning of free trade]. Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
- Frank, J. 2004. Coffee and state authority in Colombia. Counterpunch , January 6. Accessed March 12, 2017. http://www.counterpunch.org/2004/01/06/coffee-andstate-authority-in-colombia/.
- Franz, M., and M. Hassler. 2010. The value of commodity biographies: Integrating tribal farmers in India into a global organic agro-food network. Area 42 (1):25 -34.
- Gereffi, G. 1994. The organization of buyer-driven global commodity chains: How U.S. retailers shape overseas production networks. In Commodity chains and global capitalism , ed. G. Gereffi and M. Korzeniewicz, 95 -122. Westport, CT: Praeger.
- ---. 1995. Global production systems and third world development. In Global change, regional response: The new international context of development , ed. B. Stallings, 100 -142. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Gereffi, G., J. Humphrey, and T. Sturgeon. 2005. The governance of global value chains. Review of International Political Economy 12 (1):78 -104.

- Gereffi, G., and M. Korzeniewicz. 1994. Commodity chains and global capitalism . Westport, CT: Praeger.
- Gereffi, G., and X. Luo. 2015. Risks and opportunities of participation in global value chains. Journal of Banking and Financial Economics 2 (4):51 -63.
- Gibbon, P. 2001. Upgrading primary production: A commodity chain approach. World Development 29 (2):345 -63.
- The Gold Standard 2018. What we do j The Gold Standard. Accessed February 20, 2018. https://www. goldstandard.org/ our-work/what-we-do.
- Goldstein, A., and F. Ruef. 2016. View from the understory: State of forest carbon finance 2016 . Washington, DC: Forest Trends ' Ecosystem Marketplace.
- Hamrick, K., and A. Goldstein. 2016. Raising ambition: State of the voluntary carbon markets 2016 . Washington, DC: Forest Trends ' Ecosystem Marketplace.
- Hawkins, S., M. Nowlin, D. Ribeiro, R. Stoa, R. Longest, and J. Salzman. 2010. Contracting for forest carbon: Elements of a forest carbon purchase agreement . Washington, DC: Forest Trends and the Katoomba Group.
- Henderson, J., P. Dicken, M. Hess, N. Coe, and H. W. C. Yeung. 2002. Global production networks and the analysis of economic development. Review of International Political Economy 9 (3):436 -46.
- Hopkins, T. K., and I. Wallerstein. 1977. Patterns of development of the modern world-system. Review 1 (2):111 -45.
- Humphrey, J., and H. Schmitz. 2000. Governance and upgrading: Linking industrial cluster and global value chain research. IDS Working Paper 120, Institute of Development Studies, East Sussex, UK.
- ---. 2001. Governance in global value chains. IDS Bulletin 32 (3):19 -29.
- ---. 2002. How does insertion in global value chains affect upgrading in industrial clusters? Regional Studies 36 (9):1017 -27.
- Hurteau, M. D., B. A. Hungate, and G. W. Koch. 2009. Accounting for risk in valuing forest carbon offsets. Carbon Balance and Management 4:1.
- Kelly, E. C., and M. B. Schmitz. 2016. Forest offsets and the California compliance market: Bringing an abstract ecosystem good to market. Geoforum 75 (October):99 -109.
- Knox-Hayes, J. 2010. Constructing carbon market spacetime: Climate change and the onset of neo-modernity. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 100 (4):953 -62.
- Kossoy, A., and P. Ambrosi. 2010. State and trends of the carbon market 2010 . Washington, DC: The World Bank.
- Lessard, D. 2013. Uncertainty and risk in global supply chain. In Global value chains in a changing world , ed. D. K. Elms and P. Low, 195 -220. Geneva: World Trade Organization.
- Mansfield, B. 2004. Rules of privatization: Contradictions in neoliberal regulation of North Pacific fisheries. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 94 (3):565 -84.
- McAfee, K., and E. N. Shapiro. 2010. Payments for ecosystem services in Mexico: Nature, neoliberalism, social movements and the state. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 100 (3):579 -99.
- Osborne, T. 2013. Fixing carbon, losing ground: Payments for environmental services and land (in)security in Mexico. Human Geography 6 (1):119 -33.
- Otto, J. 2014. Pursuing climate change mitigation and poverty alleviation through market-based forest carbon schemes in Chiapas, Mexico. PhD dissertation, Department of Geography, University of Kentucky.
- ---. 2016. Participation constrained: Generating buyin and rationalizing carbon forestry labor through participatory mapping in southern Mexico. Geoforum 76 (November):28 -37.
- Peters-Stanley, M., K. Hamilton, T. Marcello, and M. Sjardin. 2011. Back to the future: State of the voluntary carbon markets 2011 . Washington, DC: Forest Trends ' Ecosystem Marketplace and Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
- Peters-Stanley, M., and D. Yin. 2013. Maneuvering the mosaic: State of the voluntary carbon markets 2013 . Washington, DC: Forest Trends ' Ecosystem Marketplace and Bloomberg New Energy Finance.
- Plan Vivo Foundation 2018. Why support Plan Vivo projects? Accessed February 20, 2018. http://www. planvivo.org/plan-vivo-certificates/.
- Ponte, S., and T. Sturgeon. 2014. Explaining governance in global value chains: A modular theory-building effort. Review of International Political Economy 21 (1):195 -223.
- Quechulpa Montalvo, S., E. Esquivel Baz  an, and S. Fournier. 2011. Plan Vivo annual report 2010 . San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.
- Raikes, P., M. F. Jensen, and S. Ponte. 2000. Global commodity chain analysis and the French fili  ere approach: Comparison and critique. Economy and Society 29 (3):390 -417.
- Rocheleau, D. E. 2015. Networked, rooted and territorial: Green grabbing and resistance in Chiapas. The Journal of Peasant Studies 42 (3 -4):695 -723.
- Valatin, G. 2011. Forests and carbon: Valuation, discounting and risk management . Edinburgh, UK: Forestry Commission.
- Vargas Guill  en, A., C. Tapia Vel  azquez, J. M. Trujillo S  anchez, J. C. de La Cruz Osorio, L. A. Mendoza Vel  azquez, M. A. Hern  andez V  azquez, S. Fournier, M. D. Ram  ı rez, and S. Quechulpa Montalvo. 2011. Fortalecimiento y expansi  on de proyectos de captura de carbono forestal en comunidades cafetaleras de la Sierra Madre [Strengthening and expanding carbon forestry projects in coffee producing communities in the Sierra Madre of Chiapas]. San Cristobal de las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico: Cooperativa AMBIO.

JONATHAN OTTO is a Lecturer in Arts Studies in Research and Writing (ASRW) in the Faculty of Arts at the University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z4, Canada. E-mail: ottojj3@gmail.com. His research interests include environmental justice, development, and climate change adaptation and mitigation in southern Mexico.