## Constructing a Prison in the Forest: Conflicts Over Nature, Paradise, and Identity

## Deborah Che

Department of Geography, Western Michigan University

Prison expansion can be considered a geographical solution to deindustrialization and globalization. Postindustrial prison development to address declining productive industries in amenity-rich rural areas, however, can catalyze struggles over shifting rural land uses, ideals, and identities. Using participant observation, interviews, and texts, this article examines a prison siting in Appalachian Pennsylvania. The prison and the changes it might bring were strategically constructed by local politicians and then by citizen opponents and proponents of the prison. Alternative discourses that indicated differing levels of reliance on making a living from the local land, desires for ''working'' or ''amenity'' land uses, views toward minority newcomers associated with the prison, and legitimacy in land-use decision making played key roles in the prison debate. While prisons may seem a viable avenue for rural economic development, this article suggests that alternatives, such as indigenous, small-scale enterprises based on local resources and urban-rural coalitions, may provide more sustainable and equitable development for rural and urban areas impacted by economic restructuring. Key Words: prisons, rural development, social construction of nature.

The arrival of a prison in Forest County represents just one piece of a bigger economic pie that is still in the making. The re-making of Forest County into a stable, economically viable, socially healthy community is a job which all Forest Countians must face and embrace. The future and destiny of Forest County is fully in the citizens' hands. Salvation is in our hands.

-(Forest Press 1996c, 4)

Rural America, with surplus land and labor, has lobbied for what U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) senior demographer Calvin Beale has termed ''cellular rural development'' ( Rural Perspectives 2001). Rural communities, where traditional productive economic sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing, and resource extraction have declined, view correctional institutions and jobs as a route to economic growth, population stabilization, and a middle-class lifestyle for those residents without college degrees. Rural communities on the urban-rural fringe and those with high levels of natural amenities, however, have also experienced recreational and residential-driven population growth. Footloose and retired migrants to areas with recreational amenities have furthered the transition from production to consumption and opposed extractive and correctional land uses.

This changing commodification of the countryside has been reflected in shifting social constructions, discourses, and land uses. Urry (1992) links the ''tourist gaze,'' or the romantic, aesthetic construction of rural land for visual consumption, to the shift from production. Since associ- ated discourses can reflect a viewer's social identity and communal heritage or contest a particular communal heritage to create a new one (Carbaugh 1996), they can thus produce ways of being and living in a natural environment. The social construction of rural areas primarily for amenity uses has driven policies of land preservation and exclusion against perceived disamenity uses such as resource extraction and trailer parks and against users such as rural resource workers, youth, the working class, the poor, and racial minorities (Foster 1993; Brown 1995; White 1996; Agyeman and Spooner 1997; Kimmel and Ferber 2000, Jarosz and Lawson 2002; Milbourne 2004). Discourses stressing amenity uses that have been employed to exclude both declining productivist rural land uses as well as growing post-Fordist ones like prisons have real material implications.

In this article, I examine the discursive struggle initiated by a contested prison siting in Appalachian Forest County, Pennsylvania. In this clash, amenity versus prison land uses and meanings of rural lands/nature and identities are raised in the postindustrial future of a county desperate for jobs, investment, and a stable population.

## Incarceration Nation: Economic Restructuring and the Imprisonment of America

In contrast to declining rural production-oriented industries, the corrections industry seemingly offers

growth opportunities. The number of U.S. prisons and prisoners has exploded since the mid-1970s. In 2002 the number of people in American jails and prisons totaled 2,019,234, or four times the number prior to the escalation in incarceration. An estimated 12 percent of African American men twenty to thirty-four years old are in jail or prison, the highest rate ever measured (Butterfield 2003). A tough-on-crime policy involving a war on drugs, mandatory minimum sentencing laws, vigilant policing among urban populations distanced both spatially and in terms of educational requirements from newly created jobs in suburbs and edge cities, truth in sentencing-which requires inmates to serve minimum sentences with no time off for good behavior-and the elimination of parole have fueled the growth in prisons and prisoners (Barrett and Greene 1989; Christian Science Monitor 2001). The United States has the highest rate of incarceration of any advanced industrialized nation (Ruether 1997).

The U.S. prison expansion can be understood as a geographical solution to social and economic crises associated with globalization. Gilmore's (1998) analysis of the California prison system illustrates how prison expansion has dealt with surpluses of devalued agricultural land, finance capital no longer going to productive activities with declining profits, and urban labor formerly working in high-wage, blue-collar jobs. Given antitax, fiscal control movements and a popular anticrime campaign in California, prison expansion was the only acceptable post-Keynesian state building project. From 1979-2000, prisons as a solution to crises associated with economic restructuring have spread across the country and within individual states. In the ten states that experienced the largest growth in the number of prisons during the 1980s and 1990s, 1 the percentage of counties with at least one prison increased from 13 percent in 1979 to 31 percent in 2000 (Lawrence and Travis 2004).

The location of correctional institutions varies spatially. The overall number and percentage of prisons located in metropolitan counties increased over this period, due both to construction and the reclassification of former nonmetropolitan counties as metropolitan ones, but the number of prisons located in nonmetropolitan counties still grew despite the decrease in the number of these counties (Lawrence and Travis 2004). In nonmetropolitan counties of the ten states with the largest prison expansion, inmates made up a disproportionate percentage of the total population. This spatial mismatch between prisoners' metropolitan counties of origin and nonmetropolitan ones of incarceration affects the family and friends of inmates as well as populationbased tax revenues (Lawrence and Travis 2004). Rural counties hosting prisons have gained increased tax revenues from the added (inmate) population as well as (presumably) year-round, countercyclical, high-paying jobs, while their economically troubled urban counterparts have lost needed state tax revenues.

Forest County, Pennsylvania, is a rural county that sought such postindustrial ''cellular rural development'' in the wake of divestment and deindustrialization. The natural resource-dependent county viewed the booming prison industry as one of the few ways to replace hundreds of lost high-paying manufacturing jobs. The prison, however, was to be located amid Forest County's increasingly consumption-oriented countryside, where conflicting views of nature and place identity would lead to conflict.

## Methods

My working and living as a researcher in postindustrial Forest County were closely tied to economic recovery efforts there. Although timber harvesting in the early 1990s on the Allegheny National Forest (ANF) was unhampered, one of Forest County's major employers, an Evenflo manufacturing plant, had recently closed. The U.S. Forest Service, with authority and funding from the 1990 Farm Bill, supported the economic recovery of forest-dependent areas such as Forest County. As part of that partnership, I worked with the ANF in 1994 on a tourism promotion agency regionalization study. I returned to the ANF region a few years later to work on Forest Serviceand Forest County Action Team-supported economic recovery studies regarding the feasibility of developing ecotourism and a hunting and fishing museum in Forest County. I was working on these studies, which addressed Forest County's deindustrialization-related crisis, as well as on my related research regarding how shifts from Fordist manufacturing, monopolistic regulation, resource extraction, and blue-collar recreation (i.e., hunting) toward post-Fordist fragmented regulation and amenitybased recreation affected forest use (Che 2000), when the Allegheny Defense Project (ADP) brought the first federal court challenge on the ANF . The lawsuit halted timber harvesting on over 5,000 acres of the ANF . Official and nonofficial Forest County residents perceived that outsiders-not corporate decision makers or the Forest Service this time, but rather ''radical'' environmentalists-once again threatened the economic survival of Forest County (interviews and personal communications 1997). In the context of multiple production-related crises, the announced, but not yet constructed, state prison in Forest County generated

controversy over its effects (or lack thereof) on tourism, the economy, and the county. I was to find that the development of the prison, loss of manufacturing, increased amenity-based recreation and retirement land uses, and resource production battles were linked in shaping the postindustrial future of the county.

For my research on tourism and the prison siting, which took place between June 1997-January 1999 and in July 1999, I utilized a combination of primary and secondary data sources, including documentary/archival evidence, interviews, and participant observation. Documentary/archival evidence included articles and editorials on the Forest County prison and on tourism development from The Forest Press , a Forest County newspaper that has been published under different titles since 1867. For the prison siting, I supplemented The Forest Press with regional dailies ( Warren Times Observer , The [Oil City] Derrick ). I also obtained planning documents from the Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission. Since a large part of this work was ethnographic, I was also a participant-observer in Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission board meetings and at an open meeting/information session on the proposed state prison. Additionally, I conducted interviews with local government officials and permanent and seasonal residents regarding their preferences for productive, consumption-oriented, and/ or incarceration land uses.

I utilized discourse analysis, which rural restructuring researchers have used to study the changing social construction of rural land (Cloke, Phillips, and Thrift 1995; Cloke, Milbourne, and Thomas 1996; Philo 1997). Such discourses reflect a viewer's social identity and are related to the distribution of social power (Gee 1996). I also utilized Carbaugh's (1996) social drama approach in selecting and organizing the variety of discursive and cultural formations used to code nature and land uses and employed Fairclough's (1989) procedure for discourse analysis, which involves looking at the text's formal properties (vocabulary and grammar) and its social context in order to examine underlying ideologies. Such discourse analysis provides a way to analyze conflicting positions on prison development and their underlying differing ideologies and values. My analysis involved looking at the different ways in which elected politicians, media, citizen opponents, and citizen proponents represented the prison and the changes it would bring. Alternative depictions of the prison were part of a struggle over amenity versus productivist land uses, who was entitled to those uses (newcomers vs. long-term residents), and what was meant by ''belonging'' in rural areas. The prison expansion became a catalyst for con- flict over rural land uses, ideals, and identities in the postindustrial, increasingly amenity-rich countryside.

## A Prison in the Forest (County)

Isolated Forest County, located in Appalachian northwestern Pennsylvania (Figure 1), has been negatively affected by the shift to post-Fordism since 1980 and has lost its major manufacturing employers. The Marienville Glass Plant, which had been in operation for over sixty years until its 1982 closing, had employed 300 people ( Forest Press 1982). Its parent company, Glass Containers Corp., closed the Marienville plant, partly due to its distant location, which had higher transportation costs than other company holdings ( The Derrick 1982). Relatively high transportation and labor costs also led the county's remaining industrial employer, an Evenflo plastics plant, to shift its operations to Georgia. 2 Subsequently, Forest County had one of Pennsylvania's lowest median household incomes, its highest unemployment rate, and a small (approximately 5,000 individuals), aging, and declining population.

Given the loss of glass and plastics manufacturing jobs, Forest County was increasingly dependent on traditional forest-based industries such as timber, oil, gas, and recreation. These industries were primarily based in the ANF, which covers 42 percent of the county. Forestbased industries provided 51 percent of the county's total payroll and proprietor income (Forest County Action T eam 1994), a figure exceeding the Forest Service's 15 percent benchmark for forest dependency. Due to its limited commercial tax base, the 25 percent payments (25 percent of gross ANF receipts that go to counties with ANF lands to fund schools and roads) were also critical. From 1987-1997, Forest County received a total of $13.9 million, or an average of more than $1 million annually. Up until 1997, the ANF's production of 80 percent of the world's black cherry sawtimber and veneer (USDA Forest Service 1998) led to its having the highest earnings in the National Forest system; continued payments and timber production, however, have been affected by the ADP's appeals and lawsuits against timber sales. The ADP advocates replacing productivist timber harvesting on the forest with nonmotorized recreation.

In county planning and community visioning exercises, tourism was identified, along with the production of value-added wood products, as one of the county's few economic alternatives for the future (Singletary 1993; Forest County Action Team 1994). In 1996 tourism generated $24.26 million in traveler expenditures, $4.74 million in payroll expenditures, $3.2 million in state and

Figure 1. Marienville, Pennsylvania, and the surrounding region. The location of Marienville, site of the proposed State Correctional Institution (1) within the ANF region and (2) in relation to the greater western Pennsylvania-eastern Ohio region from where many of Forest County's seasonal residents hail.

<!-- image -->

local tax revenues, and 280 jobs (interview, K. Gingrich 1997). Forest County's good deer hunting, open space, and charming small towns have long attracted visitors. Following World War II, blue-collar residents of western Pennsylvania and eastern Ohio's industrial centers such as Pittsburgh, Cleveland, and Youngstown, Ohio, purchased lots and built seasonal homes (i.e., hunting and fishing camps) (Forest County Assessment Office 1978). Due to this historic and current recreational development, Forest County claimed to be the ''number one vacation home capital'' of the United States-75.4 percent of the county's homes were seasonal or vacation homes, compared to 3.1 percent nationwide (Weiser 2001). During holiday and hunting weekends, the influx doubled the county's population. Recently, the economic importance of retiree spending has grown as more of the Ohioand Pittsburgh-area seasonal residents have permanently moved into their former vacation homes (Molitoris 1999b).

While economically important, the recreation, retirement, timber, and oil industries, could not replace the hundreds of high-paying glass and plastics jobs lost. Given prison expansion nationwide, corrections-related economic development appeared to be a possible way out of the crisis associated with globalization. Mirroring the national trend, inmate populations and prisons have expanded across Pennsylvania since the late 1970s (Figure 2). The state inmate population increased from 8,582 in 1980 to 36,457 in 1999, driven by thenGovernor Tom Ridge's tough-on-crime stance, which included longer minimum sentences and an ''adult time for adult crime'' law. During the 1990s, Pennsylvania added nearly 10,000 beds through the construction or conversion of six new institutions and expansions to existing facilities. Its corrections department estimated that approximately 10,000 cells would be added by the first several years of the twenty-first century (Pennsylvania Department of Corrections 2001). In the early 1990s, Forest County's state representatives and county politicians first sought to get a correctional facility located in Marienville. Such a prison would address the economic distress following the 1982 Marienville Glass Plant closing, from which one commissioner felt ''the county has never recovered.'' The prison was viewed as an ''opportunity for the economic health of Forest County which should not be passed by'' ( Forest Press 1991, 1)

Figure 2. Pennsylvania State Correctional Institutions.

<!-- image -->

Sources : Pennsylvania Department of Corrections n.d.; U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census 2004.

and even more strongly as ''the answer to the survival of Forest County and its people'' ( Forest Press 1991, 12).

In 1996 Forest County's commissioners and the state representatives whose districts included Forest County succeeded in getting a $91.2 million, prototypical 1,000bed, medium-security correctional facility sited just outside Marienville ( Forest Press 1996a). According to then Secretary of Corrections Martin Horn, regional political support for the prison was critical in selecting the Marienville location:

I've noticed it's not true that all regions of this state that there is this kind of coming together and cooperation across the county lines that I've seen here in respect to this project. I say that for a reason and that reason is that when I think of where to site a prison, I'm looking for a couple of things. Obviously you're looking for a piece of land that is the right size, it's flat, it doesn't have any wetlands problems, environmental problems and all that kind of stuff, is available at a good price, and you're looking for access to water, sewage and other services and so on. But the most important thing you're looking for is the community. You're looking for the support of the community. You're looking for the political support because, as you know . . . [it's] not popular in all communities to build prisons. There certainly are people who believe that society has too many prisons, there are people who are afraid and, don't want prisons in their communities and, there are people who find all sorts of ways to throw roadblocks up in court and political shenanigans for years and in my job when I need the capacity to put the inmates some place that becomes a real problem. And one of the strongest things that this Marienville site has going for it is the consistent, deep, and very, very professional political support, both at the county, at the state General Assembly level, and that is as much a plus to this site as is the flat land, size of the acreage, price of the land, and all the other (factors) you look at . . .

-(Horn 1997)

Although positive from the perspective of the Department of Corrections, this regional political support

was the result of postindustrial northwestern Pennsylvania's struggling economy, which lagged far behind that of the state's southeast region. But regional political support did not necessarily translate into universal community support. Following the prison location decision, which was not subject to a voter referendum but was supported by elected public officials, alternative discourses on the prison and its impact were expressed. These discourses reflected how economic restructuring differentially impacted Forest County residents and their subsequent responses to the prison-development strategy.

## Representations of the Prison

Local Politicians and Media: The Prison as Job and Tax Revenue Generator

The local media and politicians emphasized the prison's provision of desperately needed jobs and revenues to postindustrial Marienville and northwest Pennsylvania. State Senator John Peterson (now U.S. Representative) noted the regional backing:

[T]he project has been endorsed and approved by every county in northwest Pennsylvania. This regional approach to attracting a project of this magnitude is a model for opening up economic opportunities in our area. This facility will have a very positive impact on at least a six-county area of western Pennsylvania, including five which border Forest County. It will be just the lift this region needs for its residents to begin to feel good about the economy of this area -( Forest Press 1996b, 1).

At the county and the state General Assembly level, the prison was represented specifically in terms of the quantitative economic benefits it would bring. State Representative Jim Lynch, who represented Forest, Warren, and Elk counties, emphasized the prison's benefits and the urgency of advancing the project. During a public meeting on the status of the prison, Lynch said,

For those who don't know what's at stake here, this is what's at stake here according to the estimates. We're talking a 1,000 bed facility with 468 employees, approximately 60% of whom would be employed in the driving area, the driving radius of Marienville, annual payroll of $31 to $32 million, turnover of two and a half times. If you look at the influx of revenue into this area, a little over $80 million a year that was not there before. There's a LOT at stake here . . . on a strictly financial basis, there's nobody in here that can say, from a financial basis, there's not going to be a boom for Marienville and the surrounding area. On a financial basis, there's no question, it will bring in millions, $80-82 million, that was not here before.

-(Lynch 1997)

While the multiplier for prisons may be closer to 1.6-2.0 than Lynch's 2.5 figure (Moberg 1996; King, Mauer, and Huling 2003)-a figure more applicable to a manufacturing plant-the prison would employ a large number of individuals in Marienville as the glass plant once did.

The county's weekly Forest Press similarly touted the quantitative economic benefits of the prison, focusing on the provision of ''over 300 jobs, with 200-250 of those available to local people,'' and adding, ''The boost to the local economy seems obvious then'' ( Forest Press 1991, 1). According to one county commissioner, these prison staff positions would not be ''just jobs,'' but rather ''family-sustaining ones,''

whereby a parent can go out and work and sustain his or her family in the traditional sense. They are the kind of jobs that once you enter that workforce, you will have a job that will provide good benefits, a good pension, the works.

-(Etzel 2000)

The ''family-sustaining'' prison jobs would thus be the post-Fordist equivalent of the highly paid manufacturing jobs that had disappeared throughout western Pennsylvania. The wages for a corrections trainee were $20,426 per year (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998), attractive in a county where the 1997 median household income was $25,702 (Center for Rural Pennsylvania 2001). County politicians continued to stress the prison's quantitative benefits, which included a projected annual payroll of $32 million and a subsequent $300,000 in earned income tax revenues earmarked for school funding (Molitoris 1999a).

While a prison employs hundreds of people on site, the benefits that host counties derive from prisons are frequently limited. According to King, Mauer, and Huling (2003), no significant difference existed between the unemployment and per capita income of New York rural counties hosting state prisons and those that did not. In part because current residents fill few prison positions due to union requirements, lack of necessary skills, or corrections department transfer eligibility standards, host counties derive limited benefits (King, Mauer, and Huling 2003). K. A. Carlson (1992) and Gilmore (1998) similarly found limited hiring of community residents by prisons in Clallam Bay, Washington, and Corcoran, California. In these cases, the commutersheds were enlarged due to the prisons' offering attractive, high wages in an economically depressed region. The New York study also found that small prison multipliers limited host-county

benefits. Local businesses typically did not win prison contracts because they did not stock needed materials or were small-scale providers that could not submit the lowest bids (King, Mauer, and Huling 2003).

Like other prison host counties, Forest County could derive limited benefits from a prison. While the initial Forest Press coverage noted the prison would generate 200-250 jobs available to local people, the prison siting was supported by every county in northwest Pennsylvania, which, like Forest County, anticipated that their residents and businesses would obtain prison employment and contracts. Additionally, as noted by Representative Lynch, 60 percent of State Correctional Institution (SCI)-Forest's jobs would be filled by people within the multicounty driving radius of Marienville. Given the political support throughout this economically depressed region, jobs would go not only to local Forest County residents; if SCI-Forest drew employees from a multicounty area, few county residents would be hired. The Forest County Comprehensive Plan estimated that 100 people, or 3 percent of the county's resident labor force (including unemployed and employed persons looking for better-paying jobs), would apply for corrections jobs. If SCI-Forest, like SCI-Albion in Erie County, hired 10 percent of applicants, only ten county residents would be hired (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998).

Likewise, spin-off sales and employment resulting from the purchase of goods and services by the facility, employees, and new residents would likely benefit the multicounty region rather than just Forest County. The county did not have large farms or wholesalers that could provide large volumes of commodities cheaply. Individual county businesses would thus have difficulty successfully bidding on prison purchases. Additionally, the county did not have large retailers to capture the bulk of consumer purchases; capital would leak to retailers in larger towns and cities outside the county. While prison visitors such as inmate families and attorneys would purchase meals and accommodations locally, attaining the estimated fifty to seventy-five new retail and service jobs would depend on the amount of new, prison-derived capital spent locally. In order to maximize the benefits of a prison, the county's comprehensive plan recommended advance preparation such as educating local businesses on state bidding procedures, organizing them into bidding consortiums, developing a community ''welcome'' packet for transfers that included information on housing opportunities, and providing residents with a short course on civil service tests. Without such advance preparation, the plan concluded that the prison would probably not adversely affect local quality of life, but it would not create benefits (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998).

Citizen Prison Supporters: The Prison as Economic Diversification Compatible with T ourism

Citizen proponents represented the prison as economic diversification compatible with Forest County's recreational and residential development. Rather than emphasizing the amount of payroll and revenues, these supporters stressed that the prison was harmonious with increasingly important amenity-based land uses. In a letter to the Forest Press editor, a Marienville resident noted, ''[W]e can have this [the prison] and our recreation environment'' (Wilson 1996, 2). Another resident and local official voiced a similar opinion, noting,

Forest County is a great place to own a camp or summer cottage. The County is abundant with natural resources, and outdoors recreational possibilities. We are a great destination for folks who want to spend a few days or a few weeks on vacation. . . . A prison is just one piece of a better economic condition in our county.

-(D. E. Carlson 1996, 2)

To supporters, the prison represented sustainable development that would help diversify the forest-dependent economy of Forest County that was now subject to cyclical resource booms and busts and seasonal tourism flows. A majority of Forest County residents (including both locals and in-migrants) who responded to a Pennsylvania State University Agricultural Extension qualityof-life survey (Singletary 1993) wanted development that would not denigrate the environment. Respondents said they wanted an industry that would conserve the natural resource base, provide job opportunities, and preserve the quality of life. The quality of life made the local area a desirable place to live, despite the fair-topoor job prospects at the time. Compared to industrial, large-scale manufacturing and processing desired only by a minority of survey respondents, a prison could fit the desired industrial profile. As one prison industry analyst noted, ''Prisons do not use a lot of chemicals, do not create noise or atmospheric pollutants, and do not lay off workers during recessions'' ( The Nation 1995).

Yet, prisons do impact the environment. Northeastern Pennsylvania's Organization of Concerned Citizens of Wayne County (OCC), along with an alliance of trout anglers and farmers, opposed a federal prison on environmental grounds. This prison, housing Washington, D.C. inmates, would be constructed on condemned private farmland and on Pennsylvania state farmland sold by the Ridge administration to the Federal Bureau

of Prisons for one dollar. Opponents claimed it would destroy prime agricultural land and heritage resources (i.e., unique agricultural and railroad sites) as well as negatively impact local waterways, endangered species, and trout (American Friends Service Committee 2001). Citizens in Wayne County had to sue to force the implementation of an Environmental Impact Statement. (The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection has since issued two construction stop orders due to runoff silting streams [ Earth First n.d.].) In Forest County, prison opponents had similar concerns about how the prison's construction and operation would impact Forest County's rural character and amenity-based tourism. This article now turns to their discourse.

## Prison Opponents: The Prison as Threat to the Natural Escape

And so even today our county is one of the last sections where one can know the peace and quiet solitude of beautiful, widely wooded tracts. With the smallest population of the 67 Pennsylvania counties, and quite untouched by the drive, stench, and rubbish of industrial life, Forest County is indeed a retreat for those who crave life in nature's own setting.

-(Davis 1952, 2).

Forest County has long been marketed as the ''Natural Escape'' for those from the county's touristgenerating areas, northeastern Ohio and western Pennsylvania's industrialized (more recently, deindustrialized) cities. The idyllic marketing image, based both on the area's natural beauty and nostalgic small-town appeal (Figure 3), harkened back to late-nineteenth-century conceptions of nature as a healthful escape from cities seen as polluted, industrial, and immigrant filled (Dunlap 1988; Jasen 1995; Brechin 1996; DeLuca and Demo 2001; Moore, Pandian, and Kosek 2003). T o vocal prison opponents, the prison would negatively affect the environmental and recreational appeal of the Natural Escape, making it more like the despoiled cities. One seasonal resident and future retiree raised the issue of the prison's perceived environmental impact at a public meeting on the prison:

The assets of this area have been its natural beauty, its attraction for sportsmen, recreation value and familyfriendly activities for residents and campers alike. Places like this are unique and will command ever-greater economic importance in the future. The introduction of a large prison with more inmates than town inhabitants will radically alter the nature of this area.

-(McDonald 1997)

According to this individual, the prison would eliminate the area's comparative advantages relative to metropolitan areas for nature-based tourism, as well as affect the well-water supply for seasonal home owners. The prison would thus trade long-term benefits from its $24 million nature-based tourism industry for short-term ones. Another former urban resident also raised the prison's environmental impact at a public meeting:

Maybe I'm the only person in this room that feels this way but I didn't move to the area from Philadelphia to come to Marienville to have a prison parked right down here. Now why are you going to take a pristine area like Forest County [emphasis added by author], and you're going to park a prison up here when nothing is here for support.

-(Henschel 1997)

Although the prison would not be exempt from environmental regulations, to prison opponents, this facility should not have been located in Marienville and the Natural Escape, since Forest County did not have the infrastructure (i.e. water, sewerage, and social services) or the population to support a working prison site.

While it has been sold as the Natural Escape, ''pristine'' Forest County can hardly be considered natural. It has been shaped by historic and present oil and timber extraction. Furthermore, the seasonal home development that the prison would impact has also changed the landscape of ''pristine'' Forest County. T o some, the unplanned seasonal camp development might represent a despoiled landscape that has affected surrounding water and visual quality. In Forest County, like much of rural Pennsylvania, weak or nonexistent land-use planning has led to haphazard recreation settlement patterns on private lands (Zelinsky 1995). During the post-World War II Fordist period when seasonal camp development escalated, Kepler Davis, editor of The Forest Republican (a predecessor of The Forest Press ), proclaimed Forest County ''The Poor Man's Playground'' because of the ''lack of restrictive regulations and the economy with which he may find it possible to make an extended vacation'' (Davis 1952, 2). Many of the seasonal camps were established on former farms and on roadside lots in the 1950s and 1960s prior to any sewage or minimum lot-size regulations. Individual camps varied widely in quality from converted school buses and tar paper shacks not built for permanent, continual use to second homes and rustic log cabins with open fireplaces, running water, and equipped kitchens. A 1974 land survey found a high percentage of the seasonal units were either deteriorating (in need of major repairs) or dilapidated (unfit for habitation) (Forest County Planning Commission 1980). Lower-quality seasonal units with poorly constructed

Figure 3. The Natural Escape.

<!-- image -->

Source : Forest County/Kinzua Country Tourism Promotion Agency 1995.

<!-- image -->

Withinthebordersof Pennsylvania's least populatedcounty,thereare:

- —no traffic lights
- --no four-lane highways
- —no radio stations
- —no daily newspapers
- --no movie theaters
- --no bowling alleys

<!-- image -->

Butforoutdoors enthusiasts,whatForest CountyDOEShave is unsurpassedbeauty and naturalsplendor.Itsairis crispand fresh.Troutfilledstreamsrustlethroughtoweringforests. Wildlife and gameforage intheunderbrush.And aftera goldensuncreepsover thehorizonof the rounded hills,theblackness of night is brokenby twinklingpin-pointsofstarlightortheglowofa cracklingcampfire.ThisisthelureofForest County.

Eachyearcountlessvisitorsaredrawntothe countyforanaturalescape.Itsnatural resourcesofferfourfullseasonsofoutdoor recreationfortheindividual andfor thefamily. Tucked\_awayinnorthwesternPennsylvania, ForestCountycovers420squaremilesandencompassesoveronehundredthousandacresof the Allegheny National Forest.

## Fishing

Large- andsmall-mouth bass,muskellunge, walleye,northernpike,trout，andpanfishare amongthespecimenscaughtinthe14.5miles oftheAlleghenyRiverflowingthroughForest County.

Thesoutheasternendofthecountyisbordered by the Clarion River, which is rapidly becoming excellentfishingwaters.

Approximately120miles\_ofmountaintrout streamsare available\_inForestCounty. Tionesta,East Hickory, Bluejay, Salmon,Littie Hickory andSpring Creeks are some of the favoritestreamsstockedwithbrook，rainbow and brown trout.

privies contributed to stream and groundwater pollution. Large camp developments with high housing densities resembled camp cities, but cities that lacked urban levels of garbage and sewerage service (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998).

At the time of the prison debate, infrastructure was not adequate to serve the seasonal camps, let alone a prison. The prison would impact the camps' well-water supply. A 1,000-bed SCI, which would house 2,032 new residents in Pennsylvania's third largest SCI, would generate daily water and sewerage demands of about 300,000 gallons per day (GPD). The current systems, however, could only handle 180,000 and 105,000 GPD, respectively. The safe yield of all existing wells in Marienville was only 91,600 GPD (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998).

In addition to the area's lack of infrastructure, opponents also suggested that the prison would increase crime and thus harm the Natural Escape's tourism industry. One sarcastically wrote, ''[L]ots of folk would enjoy a lovely family vacation in a prison town. GET REAL !'' (Zahns 1996, 2). Letters to the editor warned of prison breakouts and uprisings that would threaten the wholesome, family-vacation destination. One letter pointed out a potential tourist-attraction dilemma: ''[T]he realization hit me that there will be no further need to publish the vacation guide if the prison goes in the Marienville area. Would you take your next vacation in an area laced with 'Do Not Pick Up Hitchhikers' signs?'' (Branthoover 1996, 3). A long-time seasonal resident from the Pittsburgh suburb of Upper St. Clair warned, ''[P]eople of Marienville, choose your future carefully before you change your way of life forever in the name of progress. It will take more than better locks on your doors to protect you and your families from the likes of William Davis'' [a prison escapee] (Wagner 1996, 2). Opponents argued that the ''prison town'' stigma would hurt tourism.

The assertions that the institution would result in increased crime, long associated with cities, must be critically examined. First, proximity to prisons does not lead to decreased property values or additional crime (Rollenhagen 1999). Evidence also does not support the concern that prison visitors commit crimes while in town (Daniel 1991; Farrington and Parcells 1991; Millay 1991). Further, Pennsylvania corrections policy could also deter prison-related crime. Convicted felons could not visit a prisoner without permission of the facility's superintendent. It was also surmised that the rural environment would serve as a psychological deterrent for any would-be urban criminals (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998). Cur- rent security practices, guard training, and technology (i.e., motion sensors, microwave detectors, locked doors, video cameras) in the newer prisons make escape difficult. Thus, prison escapes rarely occur in the Pennsylvania corrections system. In 1994, only two escapes occurred. Pittsburgh's overcrowded Western Penitentiary, from which William Davis escaped, did have major security concerns. That prison, which opened in 1882, however, would be phased out as inmates were transferred to a new, state-of-the-art facility in nearby Fayette County and to the proposed Forest County facility.

The antiprison discourses mistakenly implied that the institution would bring crime to a crime-free rural idyll. Rural Forest County has long led the Commonwealth in per capita overall and property crime rates, exceeding those in Philadelphia and Allegheny Counties (the latter includes Pittsburgh) ( Atlas of Pennsylvania 1989; Forest Press 1974). Property crime, committed mainly by local youth and fellow campers against the frequently unoccupied seasonal camps, drives these statistics. Violent crime also occurs in seemingly idyllic Forest County. One Marienville businessperson noted, ''I moved away from Pittsburgh to get away from that stuff and now here it is 25 years later [1997] and we have an execution in Marienville. Before you never heard of robbing places, shooting people and beating them up'' (Thompson 1997, 2). As human-induced environmental change and crime already existed in the so-called pristine Natural Escape, opposition to the prison might have been rooted in issues of identity and belonging in rural America.

## Rural America, Identity, and Seasonal V ersus Permanent Residents: Who Belongs?

Amenity-driven recreational and residential development have fueled migration to rural areas, especially those rich in attractions such as mild climate, varied topography, and proximity to surface water (ponds, lakes, and river shorelines) (McGranahan 1999). In the 1990s, technological advances in communication and transportation enabled footloose individuals, in particular, to work and live in amenity-rich areas with low crime rates, low costs of living, and moderate winters (Green 2001; Armas 2004). The aging of America has also fostered migration to rural areas (Holmes 1997; Nelson and Sewall 2003). This amenity-driven rural residential development has been influenced both by the pull of less-developed places as well as by the push of unsatisfactory conditions in metropolitan areas elsewhere (Spain 1993).

Although rural migration involves individuals of all races, including African Americans returning to the

South, U.S.-born whites have been most prominently represented. From 1990 through 1995, more than 1.6 million people, nearly all U.S.-born whites, migrated from diverse metropolitan areas with large immigrant and/or minority populations to rural counties. Nonmetropolitan counties, which grew by 3.9 million residents in the 1990s, reversed their 1980s net population loss of 1.4 million people (USDA Economic Research Service 2000). The forty fastest-growing rural counties were at least 70 percent white, and most were at least 85 percent white 3 (Holmes 1997). White in-migrants included both the working and middle classes (Frey and Liaw 1998).

In the United States, rural areas have been viewed as idyllic given their relative absence of people and mechanical landscapes and their link to an agrarian ideal. This ideal is associated with connectedness to the land and traditional American values such as self-reliance, simplicity, and rural virtue (Dorst 1989; Bunce 1998). Rural areas' appeal can be attributed to their perceived small-town friendliness and their perceived lack of ''urban'' problems such as crime, pollution, racial conflict, and high cost of living (Louis Harris Associates 1978). This positive characterization of rural areas sharply contrasts with negative views of urban areas (Willits and Luloff 1995; Duncan and Duncan 2001).

Given the appeal of less-developed places, consumption-oriented newcomers have been less likely to welcome development. Nationwide, seasonal residents tend to be less supportive of economic development projects than permanent residents (Green et al. 1996). Longterm residents tend to welcome development in areas that have survived long-term disinvestment (Spain 1993), whereas in-migrant retirees also tend to be less sympathetic to local industry- and production-oriented economic development projects. In some timberdependent areas of California, Oregon, and Washington, where retirement income has supplanted timber income, retired newcomers have been active in trying to change what they perceive as the commodity-oriented federal land policy (Salazar, Schallau, and Lee 1986).

While in-migration can reverse population declines, such metropolitan newcomers can heighten conflicts on land and economic development issues, especially if there are perceived and/or real local-newcomer differences on resource and land-use decisions. Such conflict can result when long-time and new residents have different values about production (i.e., what is work), consumption, land use (i.e., scenic vs. economic uses of land), and preservation of the past (i.e., built vs. ''natural'' environments) (Spain 1993). Differing identities in relation to the land can affect decisions on its use in demographically changing rural communities if new- comers prefer amenities over working, extractive, or incarceration uses of the land (Salazar, Schallau, and Lee 1986; Blahna 1990; Krause 1991; Smutny and T akahashi 1999; Beyers and Nelson 2000; Nelson 2001). Other studies have suggested, however, that newcomers hold similar views to long-term residents and only serve to give voice to previously held environmental concerns (Fortmann and Kusel 1990; Smith and Krannich 2000).

As rural identity is context dependent and consists of embedded social relations (Dunk 1994), in some rural resource-based communities, belonging to the community and holding associated legitimacy to inhabiting rural space and a voice in land-use decisions are traditionally connected to the time (in generations) one's family had been in the area (Halseth 1993) or involvement in the traditional extractive industry (Dunk 1994; Brown 1995; Carroll 1995). Belonging to a community, not merely residing in it, has been used to oppose appropriation of resources by those perceived to be outsiders. In rural resource communities, Wise Use and related groups have equated belonging and legitimacy of claims to federal lands with knowledge of the environment derived from experience, duration of residence, involvement in the traditional extractive industry, and contribution to the local economy (McCarthy 2002).

In Forest County, issues of belonging, contribution to the local economy, and decision-making power have simmered following the post-World War II seasonal home boom. Even if seasonal residents had multigenerational histories of coming to the county for recreational activities and/or have eventually settled in the area, they have traditionally been regarded as outsiders, 4 distinguishable from locals born and raised in Forest County. In Forest County, so-called locals and seasonal outsiders have viewed the costs and benefits of recreational development, who belonged in Forest County, and whose voice had legitimacy on land-use decisions differently. These differences and the environmental and economic implications of camp development were highlighted in a 1970s garbage dispute. T o combat illegal waste disposal, a universal, mandatory fee would be assessed on all property owners. The financial burden of funding garbage collection, however, fell on owners of the 6,000 seasonal residences, not the 1,500 permanent residential property owners ( Forest Press 1976). In this garbage dispute, seasonal residents stressed their economic contribution to Forest County. The summer and sporting seasonal trade, which made up at least half of local stores' and restaurants' business, enabled these establishments to survive the slow winter. The Forest County Taxpayers Association, made up largely of seasonal property owners, fought the garbage collection fees,

calling them ''taxation without representation'' (Caldwell 1975) and discriminatory (Gregory 1975) to nonresident county taxpayers who could not vote in local elections. Seasonal property owners, opposed to the mandatory waste disposal fees, claimed they brought their trash home and accused ''real'' outsiders, ''pickup campers, trailers and other transient visitors who don't pay taxes'' (Fagan 1975; Lenhart 1975), of responsibility for the illegal dumping. Law enforcement records, however, showed that seasonal property owners, not ''transient'' visitors were largely responsible for illegal dumping. In this dispute, seasonal residents stressed that their recreational development benefited, rather than detracted from, the county. The nonresident taxpayers also believed that they, unlike a true group of outsiderstransient campers and visitors-deserved a voice in county decisions.

The limited seasonal input on local decision making has been long-standing, but may be changing due to inmigration. In the late 1970s, the county's Democratic and Republican chairpersons removed so-called seasonals from voting rolls, asserting that owning a camp did not confer the right to vote. Voting and residency would be based on where seasonals lived and sent their children to school ( Forest Press 1978; Musgrave 1978). In the past, such voting residency requirements essentially silenced the input of nonresident property owners, but the traditionally seasonal influx into idyllic Forest County has become increasingly permanent in nature. This migration reversed Forest County's population decline, raising the population to a little over 5,000 residents (Molitoris 1999b). Many new permanent residents were former seasonal ones. According to one county commissioner, former seasonals may now make up to 50 percent of the county's population (personal communication, G. Cussins 1999). Former seasonal residents retire to their fixed-up camps, while youth who were born and raised in the county must leave the area to find employment. As in other places experiencing an influx of migrants, conflict may result if Forest County is unable easily to absorb previously unrepresented newcomers, who have reached a critical mass enabling them to reshape the area with different values concerning production, consumption, land use, and preservation (Spain 1993).

In postindustrial Forest County, the changing permanent residential population and the continued seasonal influx have affected conceptions of who belongs and who has a voice in rural land-use decisions. As with the solid waste dispute, alternative discourses on rural identity and belonging have been raised in response to the prison that reflect differing reliance on making a living from the increasingly consumption-oriented countryside, views toward newcomers associated with the prison, and legitimacy in land-use decision making. The opposing sides used the dichotomies of local/ outsider, rural/urban, seasonal/permanent resident, and white/minority to acquire, grant, or negate legitimacy to inhabiting rural space and having a voice in land-use decisions.

## Prison Opponents: Reframing Minorities as the New Outsiders

Forest County's marketing image as the Natural Escape (Figure 3) centered on its being a paradise away from the city and its associated congestion, harried lifestyle, industry, pollution, crime, and racial tensions. While pollution and a high property-related crime rate often associated with urban areas can be found in the Natural Escape, the county has remained overwhelmingly white (98.3 percent in 1990, 95.9 percent in 2000) (Center for Rural Pennsylvania 1999, 2001). Its minority population, which is spatially concentrated at the Abraxas youth drug treatment facility, 5 is nonvisible unless facility residents are out on community service projects or if they walk (without authorization) away from the center. As in other areas hosting correctional institutions, the county's minority population would grow since African Americans, who are incarcerated at a rate fourteen times that of whites in Pennsylvania and make up 53 percent of its inmate population (Bull 2001), would be counted as residents; however, the visible minority population would remain low, unless minority prison employees or family and friends of the incarcerated moved in as new residents, since the institutionalized would not be seen outside the prison except as part of a supervised work crew.

Prison opponents, many of whom did not rely on local land use for income, tried to raise opposition to the prison by altering conceptions of who belonged in rural Forest County. Instead of the ''transient campers,'' certain seasonal property owners in the 1970s blamed for illegal waste disposal, future minority residents such as families of prison inmates were branded the new outsiders. In a public meeting on the status of the prison, the individual originally from Philadelphia said, ''[T]he problem might be people who move up here to be close to their loved ones who are in the prison and that's the big influx of our problem'' (Henschel 1997). While residents of prison host communities commonly fear that inmate families will move into town, not just visit (Duke 2000), neither studies of other such towns in other states (Daniel 1991; Farrington and Parcells 1991) nor in

Pennsylvania have shown evidence of this in-migration of prison families and friends. Only one inmate family appears to have moved into areas surrounding Pennsylvania's Rockview, Cresson, Albion, and Houtzdale SCIs (Figure 2). (This family left the area within three months due to a lack of urban services available within the community [Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998]). Likewise, Corrections Secretary Horn refuted the concern about prisoners' families moving to Marienville:

[T]his is a question that comes up every time you put a new prison in a community and that is this notion that the families of the inmates are going to move into the community and I dare anyone to show me a community where that has happened. You go and speak with people from Albion, you speak to the people in Houtzdale, you speak to the people in Somerset, you speak to people down in Greensburg, Huntington, and of all the years the prisons have been there, speak to the people in Mercer and they'll tell you it has not happened. They come by bus, they stop in your local cafe ´, and have a cup of coffee, they will stay in your motels, they will spend money in your town. That (inmate families moving in) simply has not been the experience anywhere and anyone who has that fear should lay it aside because it's misplaced.

-(Horn 1997)

Despite the lack of evidence of inmate families moving to prison host communities, opponents' underlying concerns about community/racial change remained. In part, their concern stemmed from a belief that the new minority outsiders would include prison employees residing permanently in the area. One Brunswick, Ohio, seasonal resident explicitly discussed racial demographic shifts altering the white landscape of the Natural Escape:

Since anywhere from 60% to 90% of the inmates will be black, the government will probably hire at least 50% blacks as guards. Other more qualified whites and Hispanics may be brought in from out of town. Your next door neighbor may soon be named Tyrone or Leroy or Juan 6 . . .

When the smoke clears, Johnny and Joanie may still be stuck in low pay jobs while a bunch of strangers get the high paying jobs. It will be too late to change your mind at this point. I believe that country people are just as smart as city people, but it sometimes seems that the city slicker comes up with a line of BS that rural people can't see thru.

I would recommend you tell the government to leave the trash where it was made. Build the prison in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh or Erie. Make it convenient for friends to visit inmates.

-(Christopher 1996, 2).

This opponent's discourse recalls the long-held association of dirt and filth with cities. Another individual similarly surmised how the prison employees could change Forest County's racial makeup:

Our highly respected (County Commissioner) Mr. Wagner's business card proudly reads ''Fifth Generation Forest County Resident.'' The County thrives on tourists and hunters but the disdain for ''outsiders'' settling in the area is obvious. In reality more than 500 new families will probably move into the Marienville area. With an average family size of 3 to 4, the ''locals'' will be outnumbered at least 2 to 1. Quotas will have to be met to satisfy the minorities which will not be to the liking of most Forest County residents. As a result, the balance of power will change to these new ''outsiders.''

WAKEUPFOREST COUNTY ! Your future is changing and you will not like the change.

If prisons are so good for an area, wouldn't it stand to reason that large metropolitan areas would be fighting for them? Instead, they are pawned off on very rural areas and greedily accepted by visionaries who hope for better times. There will be change, to be sure! But, do Forest Countians [sic], who have such pride in the uniqueness of the area, really want this type of change? Think hard before you act-your decision will be permanent!

-(Branthoover 1996, 3).

These opponents raised relevant points regarding the logic of locating prisons predominantly filled with urban inmates in rural areas, but they were undermined by racism. They raised the alarm that minorities would be hired for SCI-Forest, making rural, white idyllic Forest County more like the racially diverse metropolitan areas whence hail/escape many current seasonals and formerly seasonal retirees. Compared with the nearly all-white seasonal arrivals, any influx of minorities would be noticeable. While the race of seasonal property owners is not indicated on property records, there are few visible minorities in the camp developments or elsewhere in Forest County.

The marginality, ethnicity, and interracial relations explanations in recreation research could explain the absence of minority camp owners and recreationists in Forest County. Marginality and resulting low socioeconomic status may preclude minority recreation participation (West 1993). If minorities did not share in the blue-collar prosperity of Fordist Pittsburgh, Sharon, Cleveland, and Youngstown due to their late entry/integration in the steel industry and/or their concentration in lower-paying positions (Hinshaw and Modell 1996; Stein 1998), marginality could explain the absence of minority camp owners. The lack of minority wildland

recreationists could also be due to ethnicity, or cultural and subcultural traditions. Researchers have found that European Americans view forest environments, dense vegetation, and less-developed places as more pleasing than do African Americans, who prefer more open, developed, managed recreation settings (i.e., with roads and picnic tables) (Virden and Walker 1999; Tierney, Dahl, and Chavez 2001). Idlewild, a famed African American resort in northern Michigan that thrived prior to the Civil Rights era, provided vacationers with just such a developed setting in the woods (Walker and Wilson 2002). Forest County's built seasonal camp developments would seemingly appeal to African Americans, who are noticeably absent in them.

The historical racialization of both the journey to and the use of present-day recreation sites may also help explain the absence of African Americans, for whom forests historically have been places of negative interracial encounters such as chases by bloodhounds, lynchings, and Klan gatherings. Additionally, following World War II, blacks visiting ''white'' outdoor recreation areas were excluded or attacked (West 1993; Virden and Walker 1999). Even an Idlewild vacation could involve unpleasant interracial encounters on the journey from urban homes in Chicago, Detroit, and distant cities, given problems with obtaining food and other services in the pre-Civil Rights era. Thus, many Idlewilders packed all the supplies they needed for the journey to the resort. Compared to European Americans, minorities today indicate they feel less welcome when traveling. This feeling limits their desire and/or ability to visit natural areas (Tierney, Dahl, and Chavez 2001). Concerns about unpleasant encounters with other people and safety are a factor in the greater desire of African Americans for well-lit, well-supervised, developed sites. Other than the most developed, managed areas of national and state parks, rural forested areas available for recreation may lack a strict social structure. Virden and Walker (1999) note that human inhabitants around these forest environments (predominantly white) may not be constrained under society's norms or control. This situation may be a positive for white men seeking freedom in rural areas (Braun 2003) but threatening for minorities and women.

In the ANF region, interracial relations and hostility toward African American seasonal camp owners from permanent and/or seasonal residents may explain their absence. One white seasonal resident from Pittsburgh explained extant opposition to black campers,

Did you notice there are no blacks here? When [blacks] buy a camp, it burns down. It is called an ''act of God.''

Lightning strikes and burns that camp down, but none of the surrounding camps are touched.

-(personal communication, R. Critchfield 1998)

While developed and not wilderness, the largely unplanned camp developments are private. Only a few of the larger camp developments have voluntary associations (akin to neighborhood ones). They are not managed by a governmental authority. Thus, these camps may lack societal restraints regarding interracial interactions. 7

This opposition to minority residents is not uncommon among ex-urban newcomers nationwide. The shift of native-born whites from diverse metropolitan areas to rural areas may in part be considered ''white flight,'' even though urban crime, drugs, congestion, and school problems, and not race, are mentioned in the context of movement to rural areas (Holmes 1997). It is hard to measure the extent of white flight (or the flight from diversity and multiculturalism) since many people are reluctant to give race or increasing immigration as a reason they are moving to predominantly white areas (Booth 1998). Similarly, while studies have not been conducted to document white flight to southern Oregon, new arrivals in the community who say they do not want Oregon to ''become like California'' have expressed overt racism in their daily encounters with service workers and on the editorial page. According to Brown (1995), these newcomers view the small but growing migration of Hispanics to southern Oregon with apprehension.

Some former metropolitan residents of racially homogenous Forest County couched their move from metropolitan areas in terms of escaping pollution and congestion. Others explicitly brought up race, contrasting Forest County as ''peaceful, beautiful, God's country'' with ''high-crime, black'' areas they once worked and lived in (personal communications, 1997-1999). Looking at alternative discourses on the prison, it seems that part of the opposition stems from concern among current and former seasonal residents that new minority outsiders will move into their natural and white escape (Figure 4).

Current and former metropolitan area seasonals and retirees who migrate to postindustrial Forest County can more easily oppose perceived disamenity-linked economic development projects such as prisons since their income is not tied to the area. In Forest County, retirees have been among the most vocal prison opponents, as the Forest Press noted, ''[T]he detractors of the project were older citizens, retirement age for the most part.'' Their outsider status (origins from outside the county) was noted in this local weekly ( Forest Press 1997, 17). As

Figure 4. The white countryside.

<!-- image -->

Source

: Photograph by the author.

in amenity-rich areas of the West, retirees have been vocal opponents of prison development (Fullan 1989; Krause 1991). Current and former metropolitan seasonals and retirees in Forest County have wanted to preserve the rural, idyllic, traditional American countryside. The prison could increase congestion and living expenses that would affect retirees on a fixed income, they argued. Yet, prison employees living in the Forest Area School District would pay earned-income taxes, which could lessen the school tax burden, and formerly metropolitan, retired ''empty-nesters'' favored reduced school taxes.

Given that seasonal residents could not vote out the local politicians who lobbied for the prison, opposition was voiced through the editorial page. Similarly, in rural northern California, opposition to prison siting by metropolitan in-migrants represented opposition to urbanization and to the established community decisionmaking process and status arrangement (i.e., lack of status to in-comers) (Krause 1992). The underlying, polarizing issue of race in the Forest County prison debate was used by those with limited status and political power in the community to raise concerns about a group of newer outsiders.

Prison Proponents: Young Outsiders Needed to Boost Rural Populations

Prison proponents, who were tied more closely to the local economy, viewed the prison positively as bringing in both jobs and associated newcomers that could revitalize a dying Marienville. In contrast to the opponents, the proponents were described by the Forest Press as ''mostly younger (people) who voiced concern about limited employment and the problems of keeping the school open with a declining student population'' ( Forest Press 1997, 17). Given Marienville's loss of youth and jobs, proponents broadened the concept of who belonged in the rural area to include in-migrants, who in the past had been viewed with ambivalence. The prison supporters' discourse saw the prison as infusing revenues and a younger population that could help keep the community's businesses and social institutions alive. One resident wrote,

I want to speak to the people of Marienville in regards to the proposed building of the new prison. We need to sit back and look at what we have, NOT MUCH!

Young people leaving the community in droves, homes in need of repair, but no money to do it. Businesses holding on by a thread. Roads in need of repair, but again no money. People driving at least 20 miles for work. A fire department with barely enough active members to keep it afloat. Apartments that no one rents, so they aren't livable. Land that is available for new home construction but is not being developed. Why is this? Because there are no jobs, thus no money . . . This is our last chance, folks, to bring a dying town back to life. T o make a better living for ourselves and our children. T o see new businesses, lower prices, improved roads, something to be proud of and the ability to say we did it. Just say ''yes,'' to the prison.

-(Asel 1996, 2)

Another citizen similarly publicly lobbied for the prison, writing,

The anticipated facility will bring several hundred thousand dollars in annual tax revenues and several hundred much needed jobs to the area. T o keep the employees here, all that is needed is the development of housing in our area. Wake up, people! Our community is dying around us. Does Anyone Care?

-(Wilson 1996, 2)

To supporters, the prison could keep young families in the area, attract new ones, and help sustain institutions such as the local high school and the volunteer fire department. A state prison would thus provide a more enduring legacy for Marienville's children than the profit-oriented, shuttered Marienville Glass Plant. It would keep the community suffering from depopulation and disinvestment alive.

The acceptable newcomers associated with the prison could include racial minorities. One Forest County resident responded to the overt racism in the letter to the

editor written by the Brunswick, Ohio, seasonal resident (excerpted above), who characterized the prison-related population influx as ''T yrone, Leroy, or Juan moving next door.'' The self-described ''Forest County country boy'' wrote in response,

If Tyrone or Juan is a decent human being, their living beside me wouldn't offend me. However, living in a County where Mr. Letter-writer has a camp does offend me. Seeing ''thru'' that line of B.S. was easy for this country boy, I certainly hope it was just as easy for the majority of residents in Forest County. Reject the prison if you must but not because T yrone and Juan might be living next door.

Ben Franklin told the founders of this Country, during discussions about the Declaration of Independence, ''We either hang together, boys, or we will hang separately.'' We must seek the right answer concerning the prison, we must do it together as Forest Countians, we must reject and ignore this kind of overemotional, bigoted, narrow-minded blather which continues to surface concerning this important issue facing us as a County, particularly when it originates from outside our borders. It is our lives which hang in the balance. The Forest Press might consider editorial comment if they feel compelled to print this kind of material. The letter does not speak for the County.

-(D. E. Carlson 1996, 2)

In this letter, the Forest County writer utilizes issues of rural identity and belonging to counter the seasonal resident's attempt to reframe racial minorities as the new outsiders. The Forest County writer implies that the white seasonal's ''overemotional, bigoted, narrowminded'' discourse should be rejected. In doing so, the Forest County writer may be confronting how metropolitan seasonals may be exacerbating the underlying racism extant in northwestern Pennsylvania. While the 1980 Forest County Housing and Land Use Plan indicated that, unlike in Pennsylvania's cities, no discernible historic patterns of discrimination existed with regard to the county's small minority population (Forest County Planning Commission 1980), northwestern Pennsylvania is an area with historic Klan activity (Flint 2001). Given its powerlessness relative to external corporate and governmental actors making decisions on plant closures and timber harvests, it is a fertile breeding ground for extreme right groups. The Forest County writer also suggested the seasonal's discourse on prison and economic development in the county lacked legitimacy because it came from an outsider whose economic future did not depend on the institution. The above discourse reasserted seasonals as outsiders with a limited voice.

The prison supporters' discourse problematically assumed, however, that the newly desired outsiders would both be accepted and settle in Forest County. While newcomers could help fill Marienville's social institutions, an influx of newcomers (regardless of race) could lead to cultural conflict and change akin to that which resulted from the postwar seasonal developments. In addition to having a ''good and willing workforce'' with a ''good work ethic,'' Secretary of Corrections Horn cited the area's homogeneity and cohesiveness as advantageous for prison siting. Marienville would be an ideal community to build a prison in since ''if an inmate happened to break out and wander down the road, he'd get noticed'' (Horn 1997). The community's homogeneity and cohesiveness could aid in the event of rare prison escapes, but it would limit newcomer assimilation.

The ultimate influx of minority employees would likely be limited. While a potential prison would hire minorities, it would largely hire regionally. Thus, its staff would demographically reflect predominantly white northwestern Pennsylvania, where residents viewed it as a source of badly needed jobs. The number of minority prison employees would also likely be limited given the difficulty of recruiting minority staff members from metropolitan areas for rural prisons (Kolbert 1989). In the recent past, the ANF, the major regional public employer, has likewise had difficulty recruiting and retaining African American employees. Recruitment difficulties stem both from employee isolation in a racially homogenous area and from housing discrimination. In Warren, Pennsylvania, where the ANF Supervisor's Office is located, employee housing problems were resolved only after the ANF Forest Supervisor asked local politicians to pressure reluctant landlords to rent to African American agency employees (personal communication, K. Frank 1994). Like SCI-Greene, which is a maximum-security prison located in 98 percent white Greene County and has a 93 percent white staff, SCIForest would likely have an overwhelmingly white staff. Incidentally, SCI-Greene has been under scrutiny for allegations of guard brutality and racism (Buckso and Dvorchak 1998) that may stem from the racial strains in the already stressful prison environment. Corrections officers have both a short, fifty-nine-year, average life span and among the highest number of days lost due to illness in any industry (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998). While the proposed SCI-Forest would be a maximum/medium security prison, it might have similar potential for racial conflict (Smith 1995).

The lack of available housing for employees, regardless of race, could prove the greater barrier to migration into Marienville and the county. While one Marienville resident and prison booster said, ''[T]o keep the em-

ployees here, all that is needed is the development of housing in our area,'' planning to develop housing must occur prior to and during the construction of the prison. Only sixty housing units are available for sale or rent in the county at any given time. Due to limited housing in the county and the availability of alternatives within a thirty-mile commute outside the county, Forest County would not keep all transferring corrections employees as residents. The county, as a whole, might gain forty-five households (ninety persons) (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998). Prison employee relocation outside the host county would reduce the prison's local economic development benefits (Uhland 1992). To maximize its benefits, Forest County would need to keep as many transferring employees in the county since only county residents pay the 1 percent earned-income tax assessed on wages and salaries. If prison employees lived outside the county, they would only pay a negligible $10 annual occupational privilege tax. Given the local housing market, many of the transfers probably would not live in Marienville or Forest County but somewhere within the multicountry northwestern Pennsylvania region that lobbied for the prison. Because prison employees, unlike inmates, can choose where they want to live, the expectations about the local employment benefits of prisons may be overstated (Clement 2002).

## Conclusions

Rural lands and nature have long been sites of contestation between amenity-based and productivist uses, who is entitled to those uses, and who really belongs in rural areas. The conflict over prison siting occurs in the complex relationship between the economic concerns of an established white rural population that is low-income and has a high rate of unemployment, the ideological definition of ''nature'' held by recent in-migrants who are also white and seeking an amenity-rich environment, and the identities of both these groups set against a perceived influx of urban, minority people. The tension between the economic and lifestyle motivations of the proponents and opponents of the prison needs to be understood in a wider social context that includes both the economic effects of restructuring in both urban and rural areas and the changes in those areas that result from contemporary forms of racialization focused on the issue of prison siting. The siting of the Forest County prison, with a disproportionately large minority inmate population and minority employees and prison family members potentially living in the community, would initiate a struggle over the increasingly consumption- oriented countryside. Issues of class, race, identity, and the relations between city and country were raised as the postindustrial prison fix initiated a struggle over amenity-based versus prison land uses, meanings of rural lands/ nature, identities, and the postindustrial future of a poor county. Marienville is now a prison host community. In response to Corrections Department statistics showing that more prison beds were needed, the state formally released $126.1 million in 2000 to construct the 1,000cell medium/maximum security SCI-Forest, which would be part of a 5,000-bed state prison expansion (Etzel 2000). While state budget problems and infrastructure (water, sewer) upgrades slowed its opening, in late October 2004 SCI-Forest received its first set of inmates from the closing SCI-Pittsburgh.

While the ultimate impacts of SCI-Forest have yet to be determined, early observations of its economic spinoffs have been mixed. On the positive side, businesses have opened or expanded in Marienville, including the county's first chain hotel and daycare center (Molitoris 2004). On the other hand, few local residents have been hired at the prison thus far as experienced transfers have been needed to open SCI-Forest. One Forest County commissioner heard that county residents who were among the thousands applying at a 2002 job fair for the 600-700 positions available after transfers were accounted for were now being called up for positions. But, as the commissioner noted, jobs will also go to people throughout northwestern Pennsylvania: ''The superintendent (of SCI-Forest) has made a commitment to the Forest County commissioners that he will do all he can to see that Forest County individuals that qualify [emphasis added by author] get employed if it's at all possible-as well as those in the neighboring regional counties that have helped bring the prison to Forest County'' (Molitoris 2004). Even with courses and fairs, Forest County residents will likely find getting jobs and contracts at SCI-Forest difficult since they will be competing against better-qualified people statewide. Likewise, Marienville has not had an influx of new residents. According to a local realtor, there have been few home sales to transfers, partly due to the Marienville area's limited housing stock, but also because people are commuting in (Hayes 2004). While its boosters hoped the prison would be the salvation for Marienville and Forest County, Forest County will likely derive limited economic benefits.

Even though prisons have not stimulated economic development in other rural counties, the official push at local, county, regional, and state levels to locate a prison in Forest County can be understood as a geographical solution to economic restructuring (Gilmore 1998).

Throughout northwestern Pennsylvania, the appeal of a prison with hundreds of high-paying, relatively secure jobs with benefits was comprehensible given the loss of such jobs in manufacturing. The prison represented a way to a middle-class lifestyle that would enable youth with otherwise limited job opportunities to stay in the area, rather than leaving for larger cities or joining the military. At the state level, Forest County was seen as an ideal place to locate the prison. While there was not unanimous support for the prison, there was limited effective opposition raising ''roadblocks up in court and political shenanigans for years,'' which Secretary of Corrections Horn viewed as the biggest obstacle to prison siting. The Pennsylvania Department of Corrections decision, which was made with limited public input, seems to have incorporated Cerell Associates' recommendation to the California Waste Management Board for a ''decide, announce, defend'' strategy of locating waste incinerators in lower socioeconomic areas less equipped to fight them. Those opposing the prison in postindustrial Forest County, with the state's highest unemployment rate and one of the lowest median household incomes, did not have the resources to do so effectively. Economic restructuring, which has constrained opportunities for seemingly obsolescent rural working-class whites and urban working-class minorities, offers the unsavory solution of turning those in the former group who are able to obtain a position at the prison into guards of the latter. Given prisons' limited multiplier effects, the prison solution to economic restructuring does not economically develop rural host communities. Furthermore, high levels of incarceration may further destabilize the neighborhoods prisoners come from and lead to increased crime by damaging networks of informal social control, financial capacity, and community/ family interpersonal relationships and social supports (Clear, Rose, and Ryder 2001). The costly prison development strategy, based on continually locking people away, is not sustainable.

Although SCI-Forest opened in fall 2004, increasingly consumption-oriented Forest County still needs to look at economic development alternatives that can maintain the amenities and quality of life that both locals and in-migrants to the Natural Escape cherish. For retiree inmigrants, retaining the quality of life includes keeping the area's cost of living low. Without economic development, school taxes will need to be raised further, given the limited commercial and residential tax base, concern about future ANF timber harvests and payments, and school funding needs. Recently a group of local retirees, formerly metropolitan retirees, and seasonal property owners has been vocal in opposing the con- struction of a new combined primary-secondary education building.

Given the increasing presence and influence of formerly metropolitan in-migrants who are now permanent residents, economic development alternatives must recognize that the community in Forest County is changing. Changing collective visions in communities with locals and in-migrants must first be acknowledged in order to recognize both the shared values and the common denominator underlying conflicts (Spain 1993). While a Pennsylvania State University Agricultural Extension quality-of-life survey of randomly selected Forest County permanent residents (Singletary 1993) did not distinguish between locals and in-migrants, the results showed mixed public support for expanding forest-based industries. While 68 percent of Forest County permanent residents preferred to see local hardwood forests provide resources for industries generating local jobs, 70 percent were concerned that harvesting would result in logging and exporting timber out of the area. Thus, respondents supported forming cooperatives (59 percent), small-scale products (home-based and cottage) industry (72 percent), and recreation and tourism (70 percent) over possible industrial large-scale manufacturing and processing of wood products (31 percent) and logging or timbering (31 percent). The survey results may reflect common environmental concerns across the community.

Small-scale, locally owned forest products industries could conserve the natural resource base, provide job opportunities, and preserve the quality of life important to Forest County residents. While Forest Service hardwood timber harvests and payments are crucial to funding county schools and roads, Forest County, like much of Pennsylvania, derives a small percentage of their end value since they leave with little or no value added (i.e., as raw logs) (Koester 1991). An estimated 60 percent of all Pennsylvania's hardwoods and 84 percent of its veneer quality hardwoods leave the state as raw logs to highest bidders in other parts of the United States and in Europe. T o foster more value-added activities, the state has provided hardwood companies with educational (i.e., technology, business principles), marketing, and financial assistance. The combination of public and private investment statewide exceeded $200 million and is expected to create more than 2,700 jobs (Gridley 1990). Such government investment can demonstrate the viability of locally developed enterprises and foster more sustainable development than expensive business recruitment programs can (Frolik 1999). Furthermore, value-added hardwood businesses would likely remain in the area since their owners' community and personal ties to Pennsylvania's hardwood-producing region rank

higher than traditional economic siting factors like transportation, labor costs, and distance to markets (Bodenman, Smith, and Jones 1996). Hardwood businesses can also better generate economic benefits than prison development given their greater linkages with the local economy.

Some action has already been undertaken to foster local hardwood processing businesses. The Forest Service has funded a wood-waste recycling program in Forest County that would utilize locally available black cherry crotch wood for unique, upscale consumer products. This wood, which was not salable to European buyers able to outbid locals for premium veneer wood, has unique grain patterns that could be shown off in wooden bowls or fishing plugs. By demonstrating the possibilities using normally discarded waste wood, the waste wood project would address problems with both limited entrepreneurship and value-added processing of wood in the ANF region. A business based on wooden bowl manufacturing could employ seven to ten individuals within five to ten years, including those who processed the crotch wood and designed, manufactured, and marketed the bowls. Additionally, such a business could link with a local tourist facility as a sales outlet (Forest County Action Team 1997).

In addition to waste wood utilization, Forest County could also develop a ''Forest Economy Institute'' to foster secondary wood processing by providing needed training on logging, grading, skidding, sawmills, planing, and manufacturing (Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission 1998). Individuals with ties to Forest County as well as others wanting to live in an amenity-rich area with two federally designated Wild and Scenic rivers and 513,257 acres of national forest land accessible for hunting, fishing, hiking, and boating could learn about job and business possibilities. Leveraged state funding could foster smaller-scale businesses developed by local entrepreneurs. Indigenous entrepreneurship based on the county's natural resources such as value-added wood manufacturing might help the county overcome economic distress resulting from deindustrialization and limit dependency on large, external publicor private-sector employers. Indigenous development strategies that establish more community control over land, labor, and capital are more likely than amenitybased retirement to promote growth with equity by producing sustainable, living-wage jobs (Green 2001). Specialty industries based on local resources may be more sustainable than the prison industry, which relies on the continual, massive influx of state funds and prisoners. Small-scale enterprises could protect the quality of life attractive to local developers and busi- nesspersons, which a prison or prison town reputation might affect.

Finally, in looking beyond Appalachian northwestern Pennsylvania to other places where prisons are being considered but have not yet been constructed, building urban-rural coalitions may slow or possibly halt nonsustainable prison expansion. While building such urbanrural coalitions would be challenging due to urban/rural and racial divides, the urban places many prisoners come from and the rural ones where institutions are built have much in common as places left behind in the shift to post-Fordism. The newly formed Urban/Rural Coalition Against Prisons, a nationwide network working to halt further prison expansion, fought the Wayne County, Pennsylvania, facility by stressing the detrimental effects prisons have on places impacted by economic restructuring. The coalition, along with the local OCC group, focused on the prison's environmental impact on the local farming community and its impact on inmate families, since this replacement for a suburban northern Virginia facility would put inmates almost six hours away from their Washington, D.C. homes. The coalition wanted ''good jobs and sustainable economic development, not jails and prisons, for our urban and rural communities'' (American Friends Service Committee 2001). Such coalitions can help turn the focus from prison building to targeting the factors leading to crime, which have been aggravated by the post-Fordist shift. In this way, resources devoted to prison development may be used to generate a more sustainable development.

## Acknowledgements

I would like to thank Dydia DeLyser, Audrey Kobayashi, Margaret Pearce, and the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments on earlier drafts, which clarified and strengthened this article. I am particularly grateful to Audrey Kobayashi who provided comments, guidance, encouragement, and support throughout the publication process, from the initial submission up to the final draft. I would also like to thank Anne Gibson (Figure 1) and Margaret Pearce (Figure 2) for cartographic assistance.

## Notes

1. The ten states that experienced the largest growth in the number of prisons during the 1980s and 1990s were California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, New York, Ohio, and Texas (Lawrence and Travis 2004).
2. Evenflo's Georgia plant, which Forest County operations were relocated to, closed in summer 2003. Production at the

- Georgia plant, as well as that at a Wisconsin facility, was shifted to Evenflo's three other facilities in North America and the Philippines so that Evenflo could ''continue to offer its high quality products at competitive prices'' ( Forest Press 2003, 1).
3. While much of the metropolitan migration is to predominantly white, nonmetropolitan counties, this does not mean all rural areas experiencing in-migration are white. Parts of the rural Deep South, which had large African American populations, have been sites of reverse migration. Additionally, Hispanic immigrants have settled in rural counties dominated by agricultural processing plants and low-wage manufacturing (Furuseth 2003).
4. Outside visitors were referred to according to their resident origins as (1) ''up-here's'' (visitors from the Pittsburgh Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area [SMSA] who would say, ''We're up here in the mountains for the weekend.''); (2) ''Ohio-sians'' (visitors from Ohio); and (3) ''flatlanders'' (both visitors from Ohio and southwestern Pennsylvania). All these terms signify ''outsider'' status and have, to some degree, a negative connotation. The use of these terms throughout the northern deer country can be understood in the context of local, rural anxiety over the more affluent urban visitors' competition for land, hunting spots, and women/spouses (Glimm 1983).
5. Forest County's minority population has grown with the establishment of the Abraxas youth drug treatment facility. In 1990, 47 out of the 54 African American county residents resided in Howe Township, where the Abraxas facility is located. All of the other county townships or boroughs had zero to three African American residents. When one excludes the confined population at the Abraxas facility, the number of visible minorities in Forest County is minuscule.
6. Similar ''T yrone, Leroy, and Juan'' letters have circulated nationwide.
7. Some voluntary neighborhood/residential associations however have opposed minority homeowners.

## References

- Agyeman, J., and R. Spooner. 1997. Ethnicity and the rural environment. In Contested countryside cultures: Otherness, marginalisation, and rurality , ed. P . Cloke and J. Little, 197-217. London: Routledge.
- American Friends Service Committee. 2001. Farms not jails: Rural and urban citizens say no to more prisons: Wayne County residents joined by citizens from four states and Washington, DC to protest new Pennsylvania prison. http://www.afsc.org/news/2001/nrjail.htm (last accessed 7 July 2003; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Armas, G. C. 2004. Don't fence them in: Retirees head to wide open spaces. Kalamazoo Gazette , 27 March: 18.
- Asel, J. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 3 April: 2.
- Atlas of Pennsylvania . 1989. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
- Barrett, K., and R. Greene. 1989. Prisons: the punishing cost. Financial World 158 (8): 18-22.
- Beyers, W . B., and P . B. Nelson. 2000. Contemporary development forces in the nonmetropolitan west: New insights from rapidly growing communities. Journal of Rural Studies 16:459-74.
- Blahna, D. J. 1990. Social bases for resource conflicts in areas of reverse migration. In Community and forestry: Continuities in the sociology of natural resources , ed. R. G. Lee, D. R. Field, and W. R. Burch Jr., 159-78. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Bodenman, J. E., S. M. Smith, and S. B. Jones. 1996. The export-orientation of Pennsylvania's hardwood manufacturing industry. Pennsylvania Geographer 34 (2): 64-86.
- Booth, W. 1998. A white migration north from Miami. Washington Post http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-s . . . l/ longterm/meltingpot/metl1109.htm (last accessed 11 November 1998; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Branthoover, C. E. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 29 May: 3.
- Braun, B. 2003. On the raggedy edge of risk: Articulations of race and nature after biology. In Race, nature, and the politics of difference , ed. D. S. Moore, J. Kosek, and A. Pandian, 175-203. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Brechin, G. 1996. Conserving the race: Natural aristocracies, eugenics, and the U.S. conservation movement. Antipode 28 (3): 229-45.
- Brown, B. A. 1995. In timber country: Working people's stories of environmental conflict and urban flight . Philadelphia: T emple University Press.
- Buckso, M., and B. Dvorchak. 1998. Firings, charges shake up SCI Greene. Part I of special report: Maximum scrutiny: Turmoil at Greene. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . http://www.post-gazette.com/scrutiny (last accessed 13 February 2005).
- Bull, J. M. R. 2001. Pennsylvania imprisons blacks at highest rate. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . http://www.post-gazette.com/ regionstate/20010729prisons0729p4.asp (last accessed 13 February 2005).
- Bunce, M. 1998. Thirty years of farmland preservation in North America: Discourses and ideologies of a movement. Journal of Rural Studies 14 (2): 233-47.
- Butterfield, F. 2003. Prison rates among blacks reach a peak, report finds. The New York Times , 7 April: A12.
- Caldwell, T . A. 1975. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 1 January: 8.
- Carbaugh, D. 1996. Situating selves: The communication of social identities in American scenes . Albany: State University of New York Press.
- Carlson, D. E. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 29 May: 2. Carlson, K. A. 1992. Doing good and looking bad: A case study of prison/community relations. Crime and Delinquency 38 (1): 56-69.
- Carroll, M. S. 1995. Community and the northwestern logger: Continuities and changes in the era of the spotted owl . Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- Center for Rural Pennsylvania. 1999. Forest County Profile (copy in author's files).
- . 2001. Forest County Profile (copy in author's files).

FFF

- Che, D. 2000. Tourism, timber, and manufacturing: Rural restructuring, commodification and institutional relationships in Forest County, Pennsylvania. PhD dissertation, Clark University.
- Christian Science Monitor . 2001. Closing in on a record: the number of Americans in jail. 30 March: 24.
- Christopher, J. V . 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 22 May: 2.
- Clear, T . R., D. R. Rose, and J. A. Ryder. 2001. Incarceration and the community: The problem of removing and returning offenders. Crime &amp; Delinquency 47 (3): 335-51.

- Clement, D. 2002. Big house on the prairie. http://www. minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/02-01/house.cf (last accessed 24 July 2002; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Cloke, P ., P . Milbourne, and C. Thomas. 1996. The English National Forest: Local reactions to plans for renegotiated nature-society relations in the countryside. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 21:552-71.
- Cloke, P ., M. Phillips, and N. Thrift. 1995. The new middle classes and the social constructs of rural living. In Social change and the middle classes , ed. T . Butler and M. Savage, 220-38. London: UCL Press.
- Daniel, W . R. 1991. Prisons and crime rates in rural areas: The case of Lassen County. Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 17 (1&amp;2): 129-70.
- Davis, J. K. 1952. On soundings. Forest Press , 6 November: 2.
- DeLuca, K., and A. Demo. 2001. Imagining nature and erasing class and race: Carleton Watkins, John Muir, and the construction of wilderness. Environmental History 6 (4): 541-60.
- The Derrick . 1982. Shutdown: Marienville Glass Plant halts production. 16 October: 1.
- Dorst, J. D. 1989. The written suburb: An American site, an ethnographic dilemma . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
- Duke, L. 2000. Building a boom behind bars; Prisons revive small towns, but costs are emerging. Washington Post , 8 September: A1, A16.
- Duncan, J. S., and N. G. Duncan. 2001. The aestheticization of the politics of landscape preservation. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 91:387-409.
- Dunk, T. 1994. Talking about trees: Environment and society in forest workers' culture. Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology 3 (1): 14-34.
- Dunlap, T. R. 1988. Sport hunting and conservation, 18801920. Environmental Review 12 (1): 51-60.
- Earth First! The Radical Environmental Journal . n.d. Lockdown society. http://www.earthfirstjournal.org/efj/feature.cfM?ID =97&amp;issue=v21n7 (last accessed 13 February 2005).
- Etzel, J. O. 2000. Forest County prison approved. The Derrick . http://www.thederrick.com/stories/3002.shtml (last accessed 21 April 2000; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Fagan, T . J., Jr. 1975. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 1 January: 8.
- Fairclough, N. 1989. Language and power . London: Longman.
- Farrington, K., and R. P . Parcells. 1991. Correctional facilities and community crime rates: Alternative hypotheses and competing explanations. Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 17 (1&amp;2): 17-127.
- Flint, C. 2001. Right-wing resistance to the process of American hegemony: The changing political geography of nativism in Pennsylvania, 1920-1998. Political Geography 20: 763-86.
- Forest County Action Team. 1994. Forest County action plan (copy in author's files).
- FFF . 1997. Proposal for wood waste recycling pilot project (copy in author's files).
- Forest County Assessment Office. 1978. Alphabetic listing of camp names in Forest County 1978 (copy in author's files).
- Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission. 1998. Comprehensive plan . Tionesta, PA: Forest County Conservation District and Planning Commission.
- Forest County/Kinzua Country Tourism Promotion Agency. 1995. Forest County-''The Natural Escape.'' Brochure (copy in author's files).
- Forest County Planning Commission. 1980. Housing and land use plan . Tionesta, PA: Forest County Planning Commission.
- Forest Press . 1974. Forest County crime rate, the Sheriff wasn't surprised. 24 July: 4.
- FFF . 1976. Planning Commission does survey on Forest County homes. 2 June:1, 4.
- FFF . 1978. Election code clear on residency say party chairman. 1 February:1, 3.
- FFF . 1982. Officials confirm glass plant closing. 16 June:13.
- FFF . 1991. Proposed prison is seen as economic blessing. 9 January: 1, 12.
- FFF . 1996a. Capital budget bill includes 1,000 bed facility for Forest County. 3 July: 1.
- FFF . 1996b. Prison facility included in Governor's budget. 14 February:1.
- FFF . 1996c. Special report: A prison in the forest. 17 April:4.
- FFF . 1997. Prison meeting in Marienville. 1 October:17. FFF . 2003. Evenflo plans to close plant in Georgia. 29 January:1.
- Fortmann, L., and J. Kusel. 1990. New voices, old beliefs: Forest environmentalism among new and long-standing rural residents. Rural Sociology 55 (2): 214-52.
- Foster, J. B. 1993. The limits of environmentalism without class: Lessons from the ancient forest struggle in the Pacific Northwest. Capitalism, Nature, Socialism 4 (1): 11-42.
- Frey, W . H., and K.-L. Liaw. 1998. Immigrant concentration and domestic migrant dispersal: Is movement to nonmetropolitan areas ''white flight''? The Professional Geographer 50: 215-32.
- Frolik, J. 1999. Forging new businesses. The Plain Dealer . http:// www.cleveland.com/news/pdnews/metro/monday/w03entr. ssf (last accessed 5 May 1999; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Fullan, J. 1989. Gray walls in the redwoods: How Crescent City found itself wed to a maximum-security prison. San Francisco Chronicle 11 June: 14-16.
- Furuseth, O. 2003. Change in rural North Carolina: The new Hispanic presence. Paper presented at the 5th BritishAmerican-Canadian conference on Rural Geography, Exeter and Plymouth, U.K. 14-19 July, 2003.
- Gee, J. P . 1996. Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses . London: Taylor &amp; Francis.
- Gilmore, R. W . 1998. From military Keynesianism to post Keynesian militarism: Finance capital, land, labor, and opposition in the rising California prison system. PhD dissertation. Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey.
- Glimm, J. Y. 1983. Flatlanders and ridgerunners: Folktales from the mountains of northern Pennsylvania . Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
- Green, G. P . 2001. Amenities and community economic development: Strategies for sustainability. The Journal of Regional Analysis &amp; Policy 31 (2): 61-75.
- Green, G. P ., D. Marcouiller, S. Deller, D. Erkkila, and N. R. Sumathi. 1996. Local dependency, land use attitudes, and economic development: Comparisons between seasonal and permanent residents. Rural Sociology 61 (3): 427-45.
- Gregory, S. J. 1975. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 8 January: 9.

- Gridley, C. 1990. Pennsylvania's hardwood initiative has forest industry up and growing. Appalachia 2 (3): 10-17.
- Halseth, G. 1993. Communities within communities: Changing 'residential' areas at Cultus Lake, British Columbia. Journal of Rural Studies 9 (2): 175-87.
- Hayes, C. 2004. New prison receiving inmates. Warren TimesObserver , 11 November: A-1, A-3.
- Henschel, E. 1997. Statement at Forest County Prison Project Meeting, Marienville, PA, 25 September.
- Hinshaw, J., and J. Modell. 1996. Perceiving racism: Homestead from depression to deindustrialization. Pennsylvania History 63 (1): 17-52.
- Holmes, S. A. 1997. White flight from suburbs fuels rural growth. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 19 October: A14.
- Horn, M. 1997. Statement at Forest County prison project meeting, Marienville, PA, 25 September.
- Jarosz, L., and V. Lawson. 2002. Sophisticated people versus rednecks: Economic restructuring and class difference in America's West. Antipode 34 (1): 8-27.
- Jasen, P . 1995. Wild things: Nature, culture, and tourism in Ontario 1790-1914 . Toronto: University of T oronto Press.
- Kimmel, M., and A. L. Ferber. 2000. ''White men are this nation:'' Right-wing militias and the restoration of rural American masculinity. Rural Sociology 65 (4): 582-604.
- King, R. S., M. Mauer, and T . Huling. 2003. Big prisons, small towns: Prison economics in rural America . Washington, DC: The Sentencing Project.
- Koester, M. C. 1991. Market effects of an export embargo of publicly-owned logs in Pennsylvania. Master's thesis. Pennsylvania State University.
- Kolbert, E. 1989. Who wants new prisons? In New York, all of upstate. The New York Times 9 June: B1-B2.
- Krause, J. D. 1991. Community opposition to correctional facility siting: Beyond the ''NIMBY'' explanation. Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 17 (1&amp;2): 239-62.
- FFF . 1992. The effects of prison siting practices on community status arrangements: A framework applied to the siting of California state prisons. Crime &amp; Delinquency 38 (1): 27-55.
- Lawrence, S., and J. Travis. 2004. The new landscape of imprisonment: Mapping America's prison expansion . Washington, DC: Urban Institute Justice Policy Center.
- Lenhart, J. E. 1975. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 8 January: 9.
- Louis Harris Associates. 1978. A survey of citizen views and concerns about urban life . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
- Lynch, J. 1997. Statement at Forest County prison project meeting, Marienville, PA, 25 September.
- McCarthy, J. 2002. First World political ecology: Lessons from the Wise Use movement. Environment and Planning A 34:1281-1302.
- McDonald, N. 1997. Written statement at Forest County prison project meeting, Marienville, PA, 25 September.
- McGranahan, D. A. 1999. Natural amenities drive rural population change , Agricultural Economic Report Number 781. Washington, DC: USDA Economic Research Service.
- Milbourne, P . 2004. Rural poverty: Marginalization and exclusion in Britain and the United States . London: Routledge.
- Millay, J. R. 1991. From asylum to penitentiary: The social impact of Eastern Oregon Correctional Institution upon Pendleton. Humboldt Journal of Social Relations 17 (1&amp;2): 171-95.
- Moberg, D. 1996. State jobs: Economic boon or bust? http:// www.lib.niu.edu/ipo/ii960214.htm (last accessed 26 July 2002; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Molitoris, M. 1999a. Forest County prison project is still alive. The Derrick . http://www.thederrick.com/articles/showarticle. asp?t=ts&amp;id=12607 (last accessed 10 April 1999; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- FFF . 1999b. Seasonal real estate: Forest County enjoys $17 million in sales. The Derrick . http://www.thederrick.com/articles/showarticle.asp?t=ts&amp;id=12924 (last accessed 25 April 1999; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- FFF . 2004. Leadership team in place at Forest County prison. The Derrick . http://www.thederrick.com/stories/ 07142004-3014.shtml (last accessed 13 February 2005).
- Moore, D. S., A. Pandian, and J. Kosek. 2003. Introduction. The cultural politics of race and nature: T errains of power and practice. In Race, nature, and the politics of difference , ed. D. S. Moore, J. Kosek, and A. Pandian, 1-70. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Musgrave, M. 1978. Registration-Residency of voters to be challenged. Forest Press , 25 January: 1, 3.
- The Nation . 1995. The prison boom. 260 (7): 223-25.
- Nelson, P . B. 2001. Rural restructuring in the American West: Land use, family, and class discourses. Journal of Rural Studies 17:395-407.
- Nelson, P . B., and A. Sewall. 2003. Regional comparisons of metropolitan and nonmetropolitan migration in the 1970s and 1980s: Age and place implications. The Professional Geographer 55:83-99.
- Pennsylvania Department of Corrections. 2001. History of the Department of Corrections. http://www.cor.state.pa.us/ history.html (last accessed 2 July 2001; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- FFF . n.d. Institutions. http://www.cor.state.pa.us/portal/cwp/ view.asp?a=376&amp;q=126815&amp;portalNav=|(last accessed 2 July 2004; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Philo, C. 1997. Of other rurals? In Contested countryside cultures: Otherness, marginalisation and rurality , ed. P . Cloke and J. Little, 19-50. London: Routledge.
- Rollenhagen, M. 1999. Wisconsin city shows jails don't hurt property value. The Plain Dealer . http://www.cleveland.com/ news/pdnews/metro/Sunday/ca13hou.ssf (last accessed 15 June 1999; hard copy can be obtained from author).
- Ruether, R. R. 1997. We love our prisons more than our prisoners. National Catholic Reporter 33 (10): 16.
- Rural Perspectives . 2001. Prison population change. 10 (6): 7.
- Salazar, D. J., C. H. Schallau, and R. G. Lee. 1986. The growing importance of retirement income in timber-dependent areas . Research Paper PNW-359. Portland, OR: USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Research Station.
- Singletary, L. 1993. Quality of life survey: Measuring citizens' attitudes toward local economic development in the Allegheny Plateau Region (Forest County) . University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Department of Agricultural Economics and Rural Sociology/Cooperative Extension Service.
- Smith, M. 1995. Riot linked to clash of cultures; Audit cites poor prison conditions. Houston Chronicle 3 February: A29.
- Smith, M. D., and R. S. Krannich. 2000. ''Culture clash'' revisited: Newcomer and longer-term residents' attitudes toward land use, development, and environmental issues in rural communities in the Rocky Mountain West. Rural Sociology 65 (3): 396-421.

- Smutny, G., and L. T akahashi. 1999. Economic change and environmental conflict in the Western Mountain states of the USA. Environment and Planning A 31:979-95.
- Spain, D. 1993. Been-heres versus come-heres: Negotiating conflicting community identities. Journal of American Planning Association 59 (3): 156-71.
- Stein, J. 1998. Running steel, running America: Race, economic policy, and the decline of liberalism . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.
- Thompson, L. 1997. Man arrested in Marienville killing. The Derrick 9 September: 1, 2.
- Tierney, P . T ., R. Dahl, and D. Chavez. 2001. Cultural diversity in use of undeveloped natural areas by Los Angeles county residents. Tourism Management 22:271-77.
- Uhland, V . 1992. Cell blocks and economic bars. Colorado Business Magazine 19 (9): 94-101.
- Urry, J. 1992. The tourist gaze and the 'environment.' Theory, Culture, and Society 9:1-26.
- USDA Economic Research Service. 2000. Rural population and migration: Rural population change. http://www.ers.usda. gov/briefing/Population/popchange (last accessed 13 July 2001).
- USDA Forest Service, Allegheny National Forest. 1998. ANF Fact Sheet (copy in author's files).
- U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the Census. 2004. PennsylvaniaMetropolitan areas, counties, and central cities. http://
- www.census.gov/geo/www/mapGallery/stma99.pdf (last accessed 26 June 2004).
- Virden, R. J., and G. J. Walker. 1999. Ethnic/racial and gender variations among meanings given to, and preferences for, the natural environment. Leisure Sciences 21:219-39.
- Wagner, J. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 13 April: 2.
- Walker, L., and B. C. Wilson. 2002. Black Eden: The Idlewild community . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.
- Weiser, C. 2001. More Americans buy, build vacation homes. Florida T oday , 3 June: 14A.
- West, P . C. 1993. The tyranny of metaphor: Interracial relations, minority recreation, and the wildland-urban interface. In Culture, conflict, and communication in the wildland-urban interface , eds, A. W . Ewert, D. J. Chavez, and A. W . Magill, 109-15. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
- White, R. 1996. Are you an environmentalist or do you work for a living? Work and nature. In Uncommon ground: Rethinking the human place in nature , ed. W. Cronon, 171-85. New York: W . W . Norton and Co.
- Willits, F . K., and A. E. Luloff. 1995. Urban residents' views of rurality and contacts with rural places. Rural Sociology 60 (3): 454-66.
- Wilson, L. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 27 March: 2. Zahns, The. 1996. Letter to the editor. Forest Press , 20 March: 2.
- Zelinsky, W. 1995. Recreation and tourism. In A geography of Pennsylvania , ed. E. W . Miller, 165-82. University Park: The Pennsylvania State University.

Correspondence : Department of Geography, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo, MI 49008, e-mail: deborah.che@wmich.edu.