<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## 'We Plant Only Cotton to Maximize Our Earnings': The Paradox of Food Sovereignty in Rural Telengana, India

## Elizabeth Louis

To cite this article: Elizabeth Louis (2015) 'We Plant Only Cotton to Maximize Our Earnings': The Paradox of Food Sovereignty in Rural Telengana, India, The Professional Geographer, 67:4, 586-594, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2014.983590

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2014.983590

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 12 Jan 2015.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 59

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## 'We Plant Only Cotton to Maximize Our Earnings': The Paradox of Food Sovereignty in Rural Telengana, India

## Elizabeth Louis

Texas A&amp;M University

This article critically examines the role of food sovereignty interventions in the mitigation of the impacts of neoliberal economic policies on poor farmers in the Telengana region of India. Findings based on eighteen months of ethnographic research in the Telengana region reveal that small and poor farmers face socioeconomic and cultural constraints to the adoption of food sovereignty practices and ideals. Food sovereignty prescriptions based on localized, sustainable, and subsistence agriculture paradoxically constrained farmers' chances of maintaining viable rural livelihoods in a harsh economic climate. Based on these findings, I argue that contrary to assertions by advocates that food sovereignty is a precondition to genuine food security, farmers must first have food and livelihood security to exercise true food sovereignty that allows them more control over their livelihoods. Key Words: food sovereignty, food security, rural livelihoods.

/ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ6053 /ZdZ1872 /ZdZ5459 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ7660 /ZdZ16114 , /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ1787 /ZdZ17575 /ZdZ6876 /ZdZ14102 /ZdZ10845 /ZdZ871/ZdZ885 /ZdZ13307 /ZdZ8826 /ZdZ6763 /ZdZ12418 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ2204 /ZdZ5074 /ZdZ8732 /ZdZ1106 /ZdZ17682 /ZdZ13279 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ3339 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ16983 /ZdZ12195 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ17740 /ZdZ5948 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1758/ZdZ1831 /ZdZ857 , /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ4277 /ZdZ1684 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1015 /ZdZ1681 /ZdZ5996/ZdZ6042 /ZdZ9280 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ16126 /ZdZ14238 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ5949 /ZdZ954 /ZdZ8732 /ZdZ1106 /ZdZ17682 /ZdZ13279 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ3339 /ZdZ17671 /ZdZ15736 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ2157 /ZdZ1687 /ZdZ854 /ZdZ7220 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ6907 /ZdZ5379 /ZdZ16687 /ZdZ7441 /ZdZ887 /ZdZ11584 /ZdZ12194 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ10460 , /ZdZ7018 /ZdZ11878 /ZdZ4411 /ZdZ3255 /ZdZ832 /ZdZ16983 /ZdZ3100 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ4411 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ8509 , /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ6349 /ZdZ13279 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ871 /ZdZ7279 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ17185 /ZdZ2488 /ZdZ10546 /ZdZ5409 /ZdZ822 , /ZdZ19598 /ZdZ864 /ZdZ11372 /ZdZ11882 /ZdZ1094 /ZdZ13307 /ZdZ8826 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ19324 /ZdZ1890 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ7525 /ZdZ6298 /ZdZ3156/ZdZ3164 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ543 /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ6189 /ZdZ13337 /ZdZ832 /ZdZ14102 /ZdZ13317 /ZdZ14102 /ZdZ17119 /ZdZ5179 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ838 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ871 /ZdZ7279 /ZdZ16112 /ZdZ14383 , /ZdZ11527 /ZdZ11306 /ZdZ3164 /ZdZ19324 /ZdZ1890 /ZdZ946 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ849 /ZdZ18083 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ13307 /ZdZ8826 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ857 , /ZdZ13344 /ZdZ6189 /ZdZ1843 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ15736 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ16589 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ7270 /ZdZ1094 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ5949 /ZdZ7525 /ZdZ6298 /ZdZ17669 /ZdZ967 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ10460 /ZdZ871 /ZdZ5196 , /ZdZ826 /ZdZ1357 /ZdZ16602 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ871 /ZdZ7279 /ZdZ1160 /ZdZ870 /ZdZ11339 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ4277 /ZdZ1684 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1652/ZdZ1759 /ZdZ7309 /ZdZ1058 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ2297 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ7003 , /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ5361 /ZdZ19879 /ZdZ20162 /ZdZ1652 /ZdZ14563 /ZdZ5315 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ16589 /ZdZ4277 /ZdZ1684 , /ZdZ6009 /ZdZ13865 /ZdZ4298 /ZdZ17185 /ZdZ1195 /ZdZ1698 /ZdZ7200 /ZdZ13865 /ZdZ6355 /ZdZ1890 /ZdZ14102 /ZdZ17367 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ16589 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ11339 /ZdZ8335 /ZdZ12762 /ZdZ19979 /ZdZ871 /ZdZ7279 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1262 /ZdZ9229 /ZdZ7975 : /ZdZ6173 /ZdZ9728 /ZdZ855 /ZdZ3861 , /ZdZ6173 /ZdZ9728 /ZdZ2473 /ZdZ1254 , /ZdZ1288 /ZdZ3869 /ZdZ5326 /ZdZ4509 /ZdZ544

Este art´ ıculo examina cr´ ıticamente el papel de las intervenciones de la soberan´ ıa alimentaria en la mitigaci´ on de los impactos ejercidos por pol´ ıticas econ ´ omicas neoliberales sobre los agricultores pobres de la regi´ on Telengana, en la India. Los hallazgos logrados con base en dieciocho meses de investigaci´ on etnogr´ afica en esa regi´ on revelan que los agricultores peque˜ nos y pobres tienen que enfrentar restricciones socioecon´ omicas y culturales para la adopci´ on de las pr´ acticas e ideales de la soberan´ ıa alimentaria. Las prescripciones de la soberan´ ıa alimentaria basada en una agricultura localizada, sostenible y de subsistencia parad´ ojicamente restringen las oportunidades de los agricultores de mantener un sistema de vida rural viable en medio de un clima econ´ omico dif´ ıcil. Bas´ andome en estos hallazgos, sostengo que al contrario de lo que proclaman sus mentores, en el sentido de ver la soberan´ ıa alimentaria como condici´ on previa para una genuina seguridad alimentaria, los agricultores primero deben tener comida y seguridad de medios de vida para ejercer una verdadera soberan´ ıa alimentaria que les permita mayor control sobre su subsistencia. Palabras clave: soberan´ ıa alimentaria, seguridad alimentaria, subsistencia rural.

I n this article I critically examine the role of food sovereignty interventions in the mitigation of the impacts of neoliberal economic policies on poor farmers in the Telengana region of India. The Telengana region has experienced high levels of agrarian distress, especially after India introduced neoliberal economic policies in the 1990s (Ghosh 2005; Nagaraj 2008). The commodification of agriculture has intensified processes of environmental degradation, land fragmentation, and water stress, which, combined with decreasing state supports and safety nets, have made rural livelihoods increasingly precarious.

Food sovereignty is put forth as a principal strategy to counteract the negative outcomes of the commodification of agriculture, which is blamed on the global corporate food regime, a system that favors particular Western nation-states and corporate interests in food and agriculture (McMichael 2005). Food sovereignty seeks to curb this trend through a strategic focus on upholding small farmers and agroecological practices (V´ ıa Campesina 1996; McMichael 2005; Desmarais

2007; Altieri 2009; Patel 2009; Martinez-Torres and Rosset 2010; Wittman, Desmarais, and Wiebe 2010). It distinguishes itself from the productivist food security paradigm that emerged after World War II as a state-sponsored strategy to increase food production to achieve food self-sufficiency, revive economies, and increase political legitimacy (McMichael 2005). Where food security is dominated by its focus on high production and efficiency, food sovereignty is animated by the principles of equity and ecological integrity. Food sovereignty's promotion of 'the peasant way' as the solution to the ills of the corporate food regime is also critiqued, however, as being a set of principles with little political analysis of how they would translate in practice (Akram-Lodhi 2013; Trauger 2013; Bernstein 2014; Edelman 2014).

This research supports emerging critiques of food sovereignty and seeks to contribute to debates on food security. Findings based on eighteen months of ethnographic research in the Telengana region reveal that small and poor farmers face socioeconomic and

cultural constraints in the adoption of food sovereignty practices and ideals. These include compulsions to participate in the market economy, changing geographies of labor, and shifting values and knowledge relating to agriculture. Food sovereignty prescriptions based on localized, sustainable, and subsistence agriculture paradoxically constrained farmers' chances of maintaining viable rural livelihoods in a harsh economic climate. Based on these findings, I argue that contrary to assertions by advocates that food sovereignty is a precondition to genuine food security, farmers must first have food and livelihood security (hereinafter food security) to exercise true food sovereignty that allows them more control over their livelihoods.

To examine the disjuncture between food sovereignty and food security, I draw on historical and contemporary critiques of neopopulist ideas promoted by alternative agricultural movements as well as more recent empirical research examining food sovereignty in the Global South. This research supports recent assertions that food sovereignty is an idea that fails to consider the complex nature of peasant societies and as a result is unable to offer concrete alternatives to the existing market and state-led programs for food security.

In the following section, I chronicle debates surrounding food sovereignty and food security. I then describe the field site and provide a brief history of agrarian transitions in the region. This is followed by a discussion of my findings on the outcomes of food sovereignty interventions in the Telengana region. I conclude by discussing the contradictions between food sovereignty and food security and highlighting the myriad problems rural dwellers face in the Telengana.

## Drawing the Lines: Food Security and Food Sovereignty

The ideological basis of food sovereignty implies control and autonomy over the food system, something that is not addressed by food security paradigms. The term attained global significance after V´ ıa Campesina, a transnational peasant coalition, deployed food sovereignty to oppose the General Agreement on Trade and Tariffs (GATT) as compromising the rights of nations to produce their basic foods and being inimical to the interests of peasant farmers (Edelman 2014). Since then, food sovereignty has been widely adopted, and its definition expanded, reflecting its growing appeal as a discursive weapon to protect the interests not only of small food producers but increasingly of consumers and states (Wittman, Desmarais, and Wiebe 2010).

Food sovereignty is a call to address the failings of the food security paradigm that do not address who produces the food, how food is produced, and who benefits from its production and sale (Desmarais 2007). The diverse array of ideological positions and class interests of those advocating for food sovereignty make it challenging to define what it actually entails, but most call for supporting small and peasant farming systems and agroecological practices-a neopopulist ideal-as essential to resist the corporate food regime (V´ ıa Campesina 1996; McMichael 2005; Windfuhr and Jons´ en 2005; Desmarais 2007; Patel 2009; MartinezTorres and Rosset 2010). Advocates highlight how the commodification of agriculture has impinged on the sovereignty of states, communities, and individuals to determine their own food policies. Food sovereignty's most identifiable battles are those that oppose the research, marketing, and cultivation of genetically modified crops, landlessness, corporate 'land grabs' for biofuels, large-scale commercial agriculture, resource extraction such as mining, and other large-scale development that displaces poor farmers or impedes their ability to make a livelihood from farming.

As food sovereignty is a relatively new concept, only recently have scholars made attempts to theorize it. Although most scholars support its progressive agenda in that it questions the unsustainability of neoliberal agriculture, they highlight how food sovereignty ideals represent a resurgence of agrarian populism and hence do little to respond to the varied, complex, and contradictory problems faced by different classes of rural dwellers (Kay 2008; Bernstein 2014).

In its simplest form, populism is defined as 'a mode of thought opposed to orthodox large-scale concentrated production in favor of small-scale individual enterprise' (Watts 1983, 80). Contemporary agrarian populists have foisted ecological sustainability onto this ideal and envision peasant farmers as supporters of a decentralized socialism who base their practices on ecological values (Cochrane 2007). Populist economic doctrines date back to the work of Russian neopopulists such as Chayanov from the early 1900s (Watts 1983). E. F. Schumacher (1993), author of Small Is Beautiful, and influential writers and scholars such as Wendell Berry and Michael Lipton and others kept these ideas alive in the 1960s and 1970s (Watts 1983).

Critiques of neopopulism highlight that strategies that uphold a localized, smallholder farming model are ahistoric and static as they fail to adequately acknowledge how the economic logic of small farms are not distinct from those of other capitalist production systems (Watts 1983; Byres 2004; Brass 2005; Bernstein 2009). Rural society is dynamic. Peasants accumulate surpluses and diversify out of agriculture. This dynamic necessarily includes the accompanying structural change, the inequality of access to resources, the necessary relations between agriculture and industry, the role of the state in these processes, as well as the relationship of peasants to other classes (Watts 1983; Byres 2004; Kay 2008; Bernstein 2009; Borras 2010). Yet, it is common for food sovereignty advocates to make claims about small farming systems that capitalist market relations are external to indigenous and peasant communities, whereas noncapitalist relations, based on a moral economy of reciprocity and production for subsistence, exist on the inside (MartinezTorres and Rosset 2010, 154).

Recent empirical research in the Global South examining food sovereignty stresses that food

sovereignty as it is currently defined is at odds with farmers' lived realities and does not enable them to achieve food security. Boyer's (2010) research in Honduras among peasant organizations belonging to V´ ıa Campesina found that there were historical, cultural, and structural constraints that prevent the acceptance of food sovereignty ideals among Honduran peasants. He concluded that Honduran peasant understandings of food security were at odds with V´ ıa Campesina's discourse of food sovereignty.

Bhattarai (2013) found that in the context of an increasingly monetized economy in rural Nepal, even a voluntary shift to agroecological farming practices by farmers who want to cut the cord of corporate dependence is not enough to provide food security that included access to education, health care, and housing. Furthermore, the younger generations' aspirations of progress moved them away from agriculture. Thus, Bhattarai calls for an expanded version of food sovereignty that does not base its solutions only in agriculture. Gartaula et al. (2013) similarly found that in rural Tamil Nadu, food sovereignty practices would not address the particular challenges farmers faced within a neoliberal agrarian economy nor meet their needs and aspirations. They found that food sovereignty was too narrow and ideological and needed to include sustainable development policies that went beyond agriculture.

Therefore, critiques of the neopopulist vision of food sovereignty are borne out by empirical research that in the context of developing countries, food security and food sovereignty ideals are contradictory. Empirical research highlights that food sovereignty strategies based solely on small farming ignore the changing realities of the contemporary countryside where the move to commercial farming and the diversification out of farm-based livelihoods is integral to achieving food security. That many 'peasants' no longer can (or want to) depend only on agriculture alone (Bernstein 2009) is also true of the Telengana region, which, as the following two sections demonstrate, pits the food security struggles of small farmers against food sovereignty ideals.

## The Telengana Context

Research was conducted among fifteen villages of the Western Medak district of the Telengana region, with two villages being the focal point of the ethnographic research. Food sovereignty interventions have been actively promoted by a nongovernmental organization (NGO), Rural Development Initiatives (RDI), in seventy-five villages in the area since the early 1990s. This research used a political ecology approach that combined a place-based study of local actors contextualized with a historical analysis of the capitalist transition of agriculture and a multiscalar treatment of food sovereignty. Methods included focus group discussions, surveys, semistructured interviews, life histories, informal discussions, and participant observation.

Secondary data in the form of land records, crop histories, and local news articles were also used.

The Telengana region (see Figure 1) forms part of a contiguous semi-arid belt and is considered 'backward' in terms of its human development (Nagaraj 2008). The region is characterized by rain-fed agriculture, poor soils, drought, and cultural and economic marginalization. Since India adopted neoliberal economic policies, already vulnerable farming systems have given way to widespread agrarian distress in the form of farmer suicides (Nagaraj 2008).

The region still primarily cultivates food crops such as sorghum, lentils, and oilseeds in nonirrigated lands and commercial crops such as sugarcane, potato, and banana in irrigated lands. Genetically modified (GM) cotton, considered by local farmers to be a high-risk crop, has in the past been cultivated by mainly large farmers. Yet, within the last seven to eight years, GM cotton and hybrid corn sold by Monsanto's local affiliates have been adopted on a large scale, even by small and marginal farmers.

Distress is not new to small and marginal farmers 2 in the region. Historically, lower castes have dealt with extreme oppression, exploitation, and hunger. Under late-Mughal rule, land and power were highly concentrated among the high castes, while untouchables and lower castes provided wage and unfree labor (Pavier 1981). Examples of earlier hardships were recounted several times during life history interviews by Dalit and lower caste families at the field site. They talked about the indignity of being hungry into the 1970s and 1980s, of having to beg for food and the compulsory unpaid labor called vetti.

The era of state-led development after independence brought some positive changes with land reforms, abolition of feudal institutions, investments in agriculture, the provision of safety nets resulting in agricultural growth, and increased food security. Many interviewees benefited from land reforms and became owner-cultivators. They reported that the availability of subsidized rice and rural employment programs greatly contributed to their food security. For the lower castes, these developments brought self-respect as culturally sanctioned poverty and social exclusion lessened.

The adoption of neoliberal economic reforms in the 1990s led to massive cuts in farming subsidies, reduced safety nets, and privatization and disinvestment in several key institutions for agriculture including credit, seeds, research, and extension services (Ghosh 2005). Costs of cultivation rose substantially as a result, leading to high debt. The reforms had differentiated impacts for the poor at the field site. Increased market engagement created new opportunities but also increased vulnerability in the face of ecological and market perturbations. Although most small farmers continued to struggle to meet their basic needs and their lives were extremely vulnerable, a majority of Dalits felt that they were better off than the past. Maniamma, an elder Dalit farmer who recounted hardships during a life history interview in 2009, explained:

Figure 1 Map of study site, Medak District in Andhra Pradesh State of India. Map credit: Charles Daveny, Cartographer, Department of Geography, University of Hawai'i at M¯ anoa. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Things are better now. We are eating well because of subsidized rice, state-provided rural employment, and the ability to cultivate our land. Our own hard work brings in wages that are high. Before we could not work in our own fields and had to work the landlord's fields. If we did not work for them they would not give us the grain we needed to survive.

This comment suggests that a combination of higher wages that came with neoliberal reforms, state welfare measures, and the breaking down of traditional feudal institutions have allowed them to cultivate their own land and sell their labor freely. These have been key to their improved food security. Small farmers are still up against insurmountable obstacles in their quest to eke out a livelihood in the Telengana region, however.

It is within this context of historical vulnerability, hunger, and marginalization and rapid commercialization that food sovereignty interventions have been promoted by RDI among small and marginal mainly Dalit women farmers. Their strategies reflect food sovereignty's overarching model for resisting the neoliberal agro-food regime, promoting localized agroecological farming that intends to improve farmers' capacity to subsist, focusing on traditionally cultivated food crops such as sorghum, millets, oilseeds, and lentils.

The majority of small and poor farmers, however, were unable to adopt localized subsistence-focused agriculture even if it improved their ability to subsist. Farmers faced many constraints including (1) compulsions to participate in an increasingly monetized economy with all the opportunities and risks that markets bring, (2) changing geographies of labor, and (3) changing values and knowledge relating to agriculture.

## Constraints to Adopting Food Sovereignty in the T elengana

Debt, Risk, and a Monetized Economy

Chinnapuram 1 Village was the locus of the 1995 anticotton protests led by the NGO with the participation of local farmers. The protests were an attempt to draw attention to the displacement of food crops by cotton and the increasing commercialization of the countryside. RDI was prescient regarding the potential of cotton to cause major upheavals in a primarily food-crop cultivating area. When they staged the protest, mainly rich farmers were cultivating cotton. Today, however, small farmers are rapidly adopting cotton cultivation, andsomelandless farmers are leasing land at exorbitant

Figure 2 Spraying a genetically modified cotton field with pesticides. Source: Author. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

rates to cultivate cotton, a trend not seen in the field site before. Historical crop reports for one research village show that cotton was first planted in 1996. Until 2003, it averaged less than 10 percent of the cultivable area. By 2004 almost half of the cultivable area was planted in cotton, representing drastic shifts in cultivation.

Cotton and corn (corn is another new commercial crop grown for chicken feed; it is not considered a food crop in the field areas) are displacing food crops like sorghum, pigeonpea, and other lentils, as well as certain high-value food crops like chickpea. Farmers explained that cotton is the only crop that brings such high returns in nonirrigated areas (Figure 2). They are well aware of the risks but also want to profit from agriculture. Balappa, a small Dalit farmer who owns two acres of nonirrigated land, explained:

Traditional crops are not being cultivated as much because with a crop like cotton one can make twenty to thirty thousand rupees in profit as opposed to very low profits from traditional crops.

Localized agriculture focused on food crops imposes limits. For example, one of RDI's most celebrated Dalit women farmers noted in a focus group discussion:

Although we have control over our agriculture, and are secure in food, shelter, and agriculture, we do not have enoughcashtoeducate our children, for marriages, sickness, and so on.

Over the last fifteen to twenty years local economies are becoming increasingly monetized. Villages have moved beyond subsistence and needs for cash are more urgent than before. In most Dalit households at the field site, children are being educated for the first time and farmers reported that health and education costs had increased dramatically. Of the 150 households surveyed, 50 percent borrowed money for costs of cultivation (including leasing land and sinking borewells), about 40 percent for marriages and other ceremonies, 30 percent for housing construction, and 25 percent for education and health.

Muniamma, a small woman farmer, noted during an interview:

If we had more land then we could afford to plant food crops, but since we have only one acre we plant only cotton to maximize our earnings.

Small farmers like her have no choice but to maximize their cash-earning opportunities and are more constrained in their cultivation choices.

Those who planted cotton and corn, however, were not happy with the absolute dominance of private actors in the seed sector. Farmers complained that the state had abdicated its role in providing the research and extension support they felt was crucial to their success as agriculturists. They preferred to buy their seeds from state extension outlets but complained that the seeds were of poor quality, making it even riskier.

## Changing Geographies of Labor

Since the RDI established itself in the region nearly thirty years ago, local geographies of labor have changed in ways that have had direct impacts on households' abilities to mobilize labor for labor-intensive farming practices. Food sovereignty practices tend to be more labor intensive in all aspects of the agricultural cycle, including selecting and storing seed, preparing

Figure 3 Woman farmer weeding a field during a drought-high labor for poor returns. Source: Author. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

the land, building soil fertility through the application of organic matter, controlling weeds and pests, harvesting, processing, and storing grain. Because agriculture is becoming increasingly feminized in the region, this work burdens women more.

Before subsidized rice became cheaply available in the early 1980s, most poor households ate traditional food such as millets. Preparing millets is time consuming and women especially appreciated the reduced labor needs of preparing a rice-based meal. Anaamma, a landless Dalit farmer who depends primarily on wage work and safety nets for food security, explained:

Subsidized rice has made things easy for us. We had to do a lot of work to prepare foxtail millet, finger millet, and other grains, pounding them with our hands to dehusk the grain.

Farmyard manure is a key input into agroecological farming and a household's ability to maintain livestock depends on labor availability. Children have traditionally taken care of livestock, but they are increasingly unable or unwilling to tend to animals. When asked why they were not growing traditional crops, Maisappa, a small Dalit farmer belonging to one of RDI's project villages, explained in a focus group discussion:

If we want traditional agriculture and food security we should not send our children to school. We can only have animals if we have people to graze them. This was done by our children. Animals give us farmyard manure that we can use on our fields. In school children are not learning anything, neither are they useful at home . . . . If I go to graze cattle then who will earn the money?

As Maisappa indicates, the formal education system not only takes children physically away from agri- cultural work, but it also leads youth to devalue an agriculture-based livelihood.

The prevalence of higher wages in the area presents high opportunity costs for small farmers who would rather earn wages than expend time and labor growing food crops that would limit them to a subsistence lifestyle (Figure 3). Lalamma, a small woman farmer in an RDI project village, for example, remarked:

From one acre I can get three bags [300 kg] of sorghum. . . . If I weed my field, I lose my daily wages from other work. To hire bullocks for ploughing costs Rs. 300 a day. The investment is so high for only three bags of sorghum. For this reason many small farmers prefer doing wage work to cultivating their own fields.

## Shifting Values Around Traditional Agriculture

Within households, there is a shift in knowledge and values around traditional subsistence crops due to the introduction of the subsidized rice program, increased material wealth, changing food preferences, and shifting values on a subsistence-focused lifestyle.

Indicating that increased material wealth has changed their diets, Somamma, a small woman farmer, recalled changed food habits during a life history interview:

Nowweeatmorewhite sorghum, subsidized rice, green gram, pigeonpea, and chickpea and less uncultivated greens like punti koora, doggal koora, and payal koora [referring to uncultivated greens from the Amaranthus and Hibiscus families]. Those days we ate more greens and less dal [prepared lentils] and hardly any vegetables. Now we eat more vegetables and also eat mutton one or two times a month.

For many Dalits, traditional foods and systems of cultivation were associated with exploitative labor institutions, hunger, and social exclusion. Valiamma, an elderly small Dalit farmer, shared her perspective on traditional foods in one of RDI's project villages:

Ambali [finger millet porridge] is poor peoples' food. It is associated with the hungry days. In those days, there was no summer work and that was the hungriest season. Now that there is chai and government subsidized rice, there is no need to make ambali.

Older farmers like her associated traditional foods and farming with the marginality and poverty of the past. Within households, there is a clear generational shift in food tastes away from traditional subsistence crops, especially the coarser grains. The younger generation frequently sought to distance themselves from traditional foods, which were perceived as a signifier of progress. Farmers confirm that because their children are not interested in eating these coarser traditional millets there is less incentive to cultivate them; as a consequence, knowledge about traditional food crops is waning. In a focus group discussion of male small farmers, the older farmers said that their diets were 50 percent rice and 50 percent sorghum bread, whereas the younger farmers said that their they preferred rice to sorghum bread and it made up around 25 percent of their diets. Although some forms of sorghum are widely eaten in the region and form a staple along with rice, the more drought-resistant or nutritious varieties are not as preferred because they are considered to be coarser, do not taste as good, or do not make white flour or soft rotis. AsoneDalitwomansmallfarmersuccinctly stated, 'People do not even eat yellow sorghum because it is not white.'

The director of RDI, who has actively promoted food sovereignty initiatives for the last two decades, shared that one of their biggest challenges is motivat- ing the younger generation to value traditional agriculture, as their situations are vastly different from their parents' and grandparents' generations. He explained:

Most of the farmers we originally worked with were farm labor and were earning small wages, sometimes as grain. They have felt hunger and complete deprivation. Attaining food security [with RDI] is precious for them. But we are not sure what will happen twenty years from now when the children go to school. The two generations that we have worked with will continue to practice traditional and agroecological cultivation.

## Discussion: Disjuncture Between Food Security and Food Sovereignty Narratives

The constraints previously discussed underscore that food sovereignty prescriptions were not rooted in the changing material conditions of peasant existence in the Telengana region and depend on an essentialized notion of peasant motivations. At the field site, all those who practiced farming, regardless of their socioeconomic standing, gender, and caste, wanted more control over their agriculture. This control, they explained, would come from access to credit, support prices, subsidies on seeds, fertilizer, power for irrigation, research and extension services, market supports, and safety nets-for which they put faith in and assigned responsibility to the state. For poor farmers and the landless, their already precarious livelihoods would be far more difficult without existing state supports, such as summer work (Figure 4), subsidized food, and other welfare measures.

In addition to state supports, the farmers' ability to negotiate their position within the market economy is crucial for achieving livelihood security. This is in contrast to food sovereignty's foundation that farmers are better served if they can limit their engagement with

Figure 4 Farming is not enough: Women farmers demanding summer wage work from the state. Source: Author. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

the market economy through a focus on agroecological farming and subsistence food crops. Unless farmers are completely isolated from the market and live subsistence livelihoods, they cannot but feel pressured to participate in an increasingly monetized economy, and move to commercial crops. Many were supportive of agroecological agriculture in principle but did not think it would allow them to gain food security. Food sovereignty thus had little to do with localization and self-sufficiency strategies promoted by RDI.

A political ecology analysis of food emphasizes the importance of power, place, context, and difference at the conjuncture of social, political, and environmental relations (Jarosz 2014). In the Telengana region, rural dwellers are confronted by several problems, including (1) chronic food insecurity and nutritional insecurity of the very poor; (2) highly ecologically unsustainable farming practices especially of high-input crops such as cotton; (3) high cost of farming and debt; (4) water stress and climate change; (5) the loss of control over biological resources and loss of biological diversity with the corporatization of agriculture; (6) social inequity; and (7) livelihood insecurity and the inability of farming to provide it and a consequent desire to leave farming. Therefore, achieving food security, supporting farming, increasing ecological sustainability of farming, and resisting the corporate global food regime might need different strategies especially in the context of landscapes where small farmers are food insecure and where agrarian landscapes are experiencing rapid commercialization.

Analyzing this disjuncture between food sovereignty andfoodsecurity highlights that both food security and food sovereignty narratives are hegemonic. A hegemonic food security narrative with its focus on productivist modes of agriculture has enabled corporate capital's control of the food system and is laying waste to our ecosystems, bodies, local knowledges, and communities (Goodman 2014). In the Telengana region, the impact of corporate capital's foray into agriculture has had profound impacts as seen in the high number of suicides among small farmers (Nagaraj 2008).

Is the food sovereignty narrative also not hegemonic in that it privileges the views of those who favor a neopopulist vision of agriculture over the needs and aspirations of small farmers? Food sovereignty narratives link environmental and social justice concerns with food security and serve as an important critique of the corporate food regime and the food security paradigm. When myriad and complex rural issues are conflated by food sovereignty advocates, however, they do not serve to improve the lives of small farmers.

This does not mean that the food sovereignty model is not viable, only that it is limited. When food crops are grown locally and sustainably, it does increase access to food for the most marginalized, especially women, and brings other benefits to the local economy. Thus the answer to the myriad and complex problems of rural Telangana might lie at the conjuncture of food security and food sovereignty and not within one or the other approach. Peasants to- day negotiate their lives within the constraints and opportunities posed by state, market, and civil society, and these should be the starting point of initiatives that aim to help them (Bebbington 2000). Unless food sovereignty movement proponents are able to recognize the constraints faced by small farmers, the limits of their radical horizon are weakened. Food sovereignty ideologues need to be willing to test their ideas against critical, empirically grounded research to consider how food sovereignty plays out in specific localities for impoverished farmers, particularly the pressures and challenges they face to shift toward commercial agriculture and high-capital-input crops (Louis 2013). /squaresolid

## Notes

- 1 Pseudonyms are used for the NGO, villages, and farmers.
- 2 Includes the landless who sharecrop, lease land, or work for wages to those who own up to five acres of nonirrigated land or three acres of irrigated land.

## Literature Cited

- Akram-Lodhi, H. 2013. Hungry for change: Farmers, food justice and the agrarian question . Halifax, NS: Fernwood.
- Altieri, M. A. 2009. Agroecology, small farms and food sovereignty. Monthly Review 61 (3): 102-13.
- Bebbington, A. 2000. Reencountering development: Livelihood transitions and place transformations in the Andes. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (3): 495-520.
- Bernstein, H. 2009. V. I. Lenin and A. V. Chayanov: Looking back, looking forward. Journal of Peasant Studies 36 (1): 55-81.
- ---.2014.Foodsovereigntyviathe'peasantway':Askeptical view. Journal of Peasant Studies 41 (6): 1031-63.
- Bhattarai, A. 2013. Transcending the focus on agrarian sector. Conference Paper No. 69, Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue International Conference, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
- Borras, S. 2010. The politics of transnational agrarian movements. Development and Change 41 (5): 771-803.
- Boyer, J. 2010. Food security, food sovereignty, and local challenges for transnational agrarian movements: The Honduras case. Journal of Peasant Studies 37 (2): 319-51.
- Brass, T. 2005. The Journal of Peasant Studies: The third decade. The Journal of Peasant Studies 32 (1): 153-241.
- Byres, T. J. 2004. Neo-classical neo-populism 25 years on: Deja vu and deja passe. Towards a critique. Journal of Agrarian Change 4 (1-2): 17-44.
- Cochrane, R. 2007. Rural poverty and impoverished theory: Cultural populism, ecofeminism, and global justice. Journal of Peasant Studies 34 (2): 167-206.
- Desmarais, A. A. 2007. La Via Campesina: Globalization and the power of peasants . Halifax, NS: Fernwood.
- Edelman, M. 2014. Food sovereignty: Forgotten genealogies and future regulatory challenges. The Journal of Peasant Studies 41 (6): 959-78.
- Gartaula, H., K. Patel, D. Johnson, and D. Moghariya. 2013. Conference Paper No. 74, Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialogue International Conference, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

- Ghosh,J. 2005. Report of the commission on farmers' welfare . Hyderabad, Andhra Pradesh, India: Government of Andhra Pradesh.
- Goodman, M. 2014. The ecologies of food power: An introduction to the Environment and Food book symposium. Sociologica Ruralis 54 (1): 94-97.
- Jarosz, L. 2014. Considering food security, sovereignty and systems narratives in Colin Sage's Environment and Food . Sociologica Ruralis 54 (1): 105-08.
- Kay, C. 2008. Reflections on Latin American rural studies in the neoliberal globalization period: A new rurality? Development and Change 39 (6): 915-43.
- Louis, E. 2013. Seed sovereignty is a just fight, but what else should we consider. Forum, Center for South Asian Studies (CSAS), University of Hawaii at Manoa, Manoa, HI.
- Martinez-Torres, M. E., and P. M. Rosset. 2010. La Via Campesina: The birth and evolution of a transnational social movement. Journal of Peasant Studies 37 (1): 149-75.
- McMichael, P. 2005. Global development and the corporate food regime. Research in Rural Sociology and Development 11: 265-300.
- Nagaraj, K. 2008. Farmers' suicide in India: Magnitudes, trends and spatial patterns . Chennai, India: Madras Institute of Development Studies.
- Patel, R. 2009. What does food sovereignty look like? Journal of Peasant Studies 36 (3): 663-73.
- Pavier, B. 1981. The Telengana movement, 1944-51 . New Delhi, India: Vikas.
- Trauger, A. 2013. Towards a geographic theory of food sovereignty in the United States. Conference paper, Food Sovereignty: A Critical Dialog International Conference, Yale University, New Haven, CT.
- Schumacher, E. F. 1993. Small is beautiful: A study of economics as if people mattered . New York: Random House.
- V´ ıa Campesina. 1996. The right to produce and access to land . Rome: V´ ıa Campesina.
- Watts, M. J. 1983. 'Good try, Mr. Paul': Populism and the politics of African land use. African Studies Review 26 (2): 73-83.
- Windfuhr, M., and J. Jons´ en. 2005. Food sovereignty: Towards democracy in localized food systems . Rugby, Warwickshire, UK: ITDG.
- Wittman, H., A. A. Desmarais, and N. Wiebe. 2010. Food sovereignty: Reconnecting food, nature and community . Oakland, CA: Food First.

ELIZABETH LOUIS is a Visiting Scholar in the Research Program at East-West Center, Honolulu, HI 96848. E-mail: elouis@hawaii.edu. Her research interests include the political economy and political ecology of agriculture, alternative food and agriculture movements, alternative consumption, rural livelihoods, and water, health, and sanitation in rural India.