<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## Toward Postsecular Feminism: Intersectionality and the Religious Subjectivities of Women Migrant Workers in China

## Quan Gao, Peter Hopkins &amp; Xinrong Ma

To cite this article: Quan Gao, Peter Hopkins &amp; Xinrong Ma (2025) Toward Postsecular Feminism: Intersectionality and the Religious Subjectivities of Women Migrant Workers in China, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 115:1, 167-183, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2024.2410002

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2024.2410002

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 22 Oct 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 505

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 3 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Toward Postsecular Feminism: Intersectionality and the Religious Subjectivities of Women Migrant Workers in China

Quan Gao, a Peter Hopkins, b and Xinrong Ma c a School of Geography and Planning, Sun Yat-sen University, China; b School of Geography, Politics, and Sociology, Newcastle University, UK; c Research Center for Public Administration &amp; School of Governance, Sun Yat-sen University, China

This article investigates the subjectivities of Christian women migrant workers within the context of China ' s social transformation, characterized by the interactive advancement of global capitalism, rural-to-urban migration, and ' Christian fever. ' Despite the burgeoning literature on women migrant workers in global capitalism within geographical scholarship, there has been less focus on women migrants ' religious subjectivity and agency. Drawing on empirical research on the intersectional experiences of women migrant workers, this article seeks to advance a postsecular feminism by bringing intersectionality into conversation with debates on postsecularity and gender inequalities. First, we examine the intersectional ' matrix of domination ' imposed through state power, Chinese patriarchal culture, and the gendered and class-based disciplinary labor regime under global capitalism, which serves as an ontological condition in which women migrants ' religious subjectivities form and are shaped. Second, we use intersectionality to help understand the process of becoming and a relation of emergence , wherein multiple agential qualities of women migrants -manifesting as counterpatriarchal subjects or through docile, tolerant, self-sacrificial, and pious femininity -arise at the intersections of religion, class, gender, and family. We therefore argue that postsecular feminist critique needs to carefully consider the patterns and diverse effects of intersectionality where both domination and religious agency are engendered and interwoven. Key Words: feminism, intersectionality, postsecularity, religious agency, women migrant workers.

S ince the reform and opening-up policy was introduced in 1978, Chinese rural migrant women have been placed at the forefront of the encounter with global capitalism and the international division of labor (Pun 2005). This transformation has not only produced a more flexible and intensive sexual and class exploitation of migrant women, but also opened up the possibility for the formation of new forms of female subjectivity (C. Y. Zhang 2014). Existing discourses in scholarship tend to link Chinese rural migrant women ' s subjectivity to the power of state socialism, global capitalism, and familial patriarchy, which collectively produce the institutionalized domination over rural women migrants (Pun 2005; Ong 2007; Jacka 2013; Gaetano 2015). This line of thought normally situates migrant women ' s subjectivity in a domination -resistance dichotomy, implying that women ' s agency solely or primarily relies on oppositional practices and the

<!-- image -->

production of countersubjectivities. For example, Pun (2005) described rural migrant women ' as a specifically Chinese subaltern, [which] embodies the dual process of domination and resistance and is marked by various forms of collaboration, transgression, and defiance that together come to make up its complex, dissident, and heterogeneous subjects ' (16). They therefore might overlook the variegation of women migrant workers ' subjectivities and agency, and largely neglect how religion might interact with women migrant workers ' subject formations.

Although geographical scholarship has shown growing interest in women migrant workers driven by global capitalism in the Global South, particularly rural women migrants in China (N. Zhang 2014; Chiu and Choi 2020; Tang et al. 2022), there is limited discussion of their religious subjectivity and agency. This oversight neglects the social reality that China has experienced a noticeable revival of

all forms of religion and in particular ' Christianity fever. ' According to the Pew Research Center (2011), there were at least 58 million Protestants in China in 2010, with women accounting for an estimated 70 percent of this population, representing an almost tenfold increase over thirty years. Christian evangelical movements in China traditionally thrived in rural areas, but this scenario is changing as tens of millions of rural Christians have migrated into cities in search of better livelihoods. Concurrently, China ' s rise as ' the workshop of the world ' has been accompanied by an exploitative and disciplined labor regime, where migrant workers suffer from uprootedness and alienation under global capitalism. For example, after 2010, eighteen migrant workers at Foxconn, the world ' s largest electronic device producer in Shenzhen, committed suicide over a two-year period due to the long-term depression caused by exploitation and alienation. It is against this backdrop that many migrant workers seek spiritual shelter and social support from Christianity. Some research has noted that Christianity has created significant influence on the social, cultural, and communal life of rural migrant workers in China ' s cities (Huang 2014; Gao and Qian 2019). Therefore how Christianity interacts with the subjectivity-formation of Chinese women migrant workers warrants close examination.

Drawing on an empirical work that examines the intersectional experiences of Christian women migrants in China, this article contributes to feminist scholarship in geography and beyond in two ways. First, we delve into how the scalar, translocal, and interlocking nature of power interactively constitutes an intersectional matrix of gender inequality, within which the subjectivities of women migrants are formed. Second, we bring intersectionality into conversation with recent debates in geography on postsecularism and connect these debates to consider how and the extent to which women ' s agency can be conveyed through or supported by religious ethics and norms (Braidotti 2008; G € okar ı ksel and Secor 2015; Vasilaki 2016; Cloke et al. 2019; Altay and Clark 2023). In particular, as Mahmood (2005) argued, ' agentival capacity is entailed not only in those acts that resist norms but also in the multiple ways in which one inhabits norms ' (15). Following the ideas of postsecular feminism, we therefore reflect on this normative-secularist understanding of women ' s subjectivity that situates women ' s agency within the domination -resistance dichotomy. Rather than simply classifying the ' dark ' and ' progressive ' sides of religion, however, we bring the idea of intersectionality into dialogue with postsecular feminism to yield a more nuanced understanding of women ' s religious agency and subjectivity. Specifically, we argue that postsecular feminism needs to carefully consider the pattern of intersectionality in which both the ' matrix of domination ' (Collins 2002) and postsecular subjectivity and agency are engendered and interwoven.

In this study, we propose to understand Christian migrant women ' s subjectivity within the intersectional ' matrix of domination ' woven by state power, Chinese patriarchal culture, and the gendered and class-based disciplinary labor regime under global capitalism, which collectively produce the subjectivities of women migrants. This intersectional structure serves as an ontological condition of living to understand how women migrants ' religious subjectivities form and are shaped. For instance, religious oppression of Christian women is activated and shaped by other oppressions like state power and patriarchal culture. On the other hand, we also consider intersectionality as a process of becoming (Collins 2019) by reflecting on how new religious subjectivities and agency are made possible within this intersectional power structure. We therefore examine how religion intersects with three forms of relations -the class position in the workplace, the gendered and embodied experiences in the church, and the intimate relations in the family -in which Christian piety might open up the possibility for reworking the way the intersectional power of denomination operates. We observe variegated and seemingly ' contradictory ' forms of religious agency emerging within the intersectional structure -whereas some forms of agency manifest in challenging patriarchal power by reclaiming women ' s intimate spaces, others are achieved through the performance of docile, hard-working, and tolerant Christian femininities, particularly through pious ways of life. Overall, while acknowledging the postsecular feminist account of religious agency that emphasizes the embodiment of ethical norms and self-realization beyond countersubjectivities (Mahmood 2005; Braidotti 2008; Vasilaki 2016), we also argue that postsecular feminism needs to be attentive to the intersectional power in which new religious agency and subjectivities are enabled or

structured. In this sense, the critical theory of postsecular feminism should pay heed to the intersectional power and multiple social inequalities that condition whether or not and the extent to which religions can address agency.

## Women Migrant Subjectivities, Postsecular Feminism, and Intersectionality

## Women Migrants Under Global Capitalism

The last two decades have witnessed the burgeoning of feminist studies of migration, with focuses on not only women ' s specific migration patterns, experiences, and subjectivities but also how gender interacts with the wider spatial politics of difference, mobility, and labor in an era of globalization (Willis and Brenda 2002; Silvey 2004, 2013; Gaetano and Brenda 2010). This line of scholarship has shifted from studying women migrants as a distinct research category to studying the gendering of migration, and in particular how gender as a system of practices or ideology permeates every aspect of migration experiences. Instead of viewing gender as a dichotomous variable that shapes patterns of migration, critical feminist migration researchers argue that gender is better understood as a constitutive element of migration, given that ' the structures that precipitate migration flows and shape the economic experiences of all migrants are [themselves] gendered ' (Nawyn 2010, 142).

Central to feminist migration studies in geography and beyond is the scalar politics that focuses on not only women migrants ' subjectivity, intimacy, and everyday life but also the broader social and political relations in which the subjectivities and inequalities are embedded and reproduced (Mountz and Hyndman 2006; Mollett and Faria 2018). Migration involves the displacement and mobility of subjects through space and place, a process that unfolds across various scales and social relations. This necessitates feminist scholars to examine the interactions and differential effects of institutions that shape women migrants ' subjectivities (Billo and Mountz 2016). As Silvey (2004) suggested, though, feminist concern with migrants ' subjectivities is distinct from the approach to identity politics that emphasizes the political implications of cultural differences. Attention to subjectivity is more sensitive to migrants ' views of who they are, their intimate and emotional life, and how gender is implicated in larger social institutions and structures (Silvey 2004, 9; Connell 2007).

One strand of research in feminist migration studies has highlighted the dominant force of global capitalism and its labor division system in producing new institutions of gender that maximize women migrants ' utility by molding or excluding particular gendered subjects. For example, driven by foreign direct investment, export-oriented manufacturing sectors often target young, single, rural women migrants, as they are constructed as being submissive and ' as having good attention to detail, able to handle delicate work ' (Fan 2007, 5). Yet this gendered quality of being submissive was linked to the making of qualified migrant workers, where being obedient, industrious, and sensitive is internalized as an indication of modern and civilized women workers as well as the constitution of new selves, in contrast to rural and ' backward ' femininities (Pun 2005). Similarly, given its interest in reinforcing the export of labor, the Filipino state depicted and hailed domestic workers as ' new national heroes, ' contributing to the discourse of the ideal worker as self-sacrificial, individualized, and hard-working (Pratt 2012). These processes of self-subjectivization actually legitimate and extend new forms of domination and patriarchal hierarchy.

Feminist geographers also note that women migrants ' intimate spaces of family, home, and household are crucial sites where the regulatory and discursive power of global capitalism is fixed and materialized. Mountz and Hyndman (2006) argued for a scalar and relational understanding of the global, asserting that ' the intimate is inextricable from the global ' (448), and serves as the very fabric of the masculinist process of globalization. Global capitalism often functions as the ' ruling relations ' that privilege certain forms of motherhood and intimate relation (Billo and Mountz 2016). For example, the ideology of motherhood that encourages Filipina migrant domestic workers to sacrifice themselves for the sake of their children and nation was manipulated to refashion women migrants ' subjectivities in congruence with the state and capitalist project (Pratt 2012). Moreover, the intimate labor of health care and domestic work has foregrounded home and household not only as sites for social reproduction of the migrant labor regime, but intimate exceptional spaces where

domestic workers ' experiences of exploitation are obfuscated (Yeoh et al. 2023). Gao and Hopkins ' s (2022) study of women rural migrant workers in China suggests that neoliberal urbanism operating through a process of defamiliarization turns rural migrants into atomized, gendered laboring subjects so as to minimize migrants ' consumption of urban welfare. In general, the regulatory power of the state and global capitalism is better understood to operate in tandem with the patriarchal culture of labor, which together discipline and produce the offshoring and feminization of laboring subjects (Pun 2005; Ong 2010; Silvey 2013). Nevertheless, there are still two important inquiries that warrant further examination. First, feminist geographers should delve into how the scalar, translocal, and interlocking nature of powers interactively constitute the matrix of gender inequality. Second, the intimate is not simply an objecttarget for regulatory and capital powers but also a relation of emergence that women ' s agency could make possible. In this article, we therefore respond to these two points by looking at how religion interacts with women migrants ' subjectivities and intimate life.

## An Intersectional Approach to Postsecular Feminism

Despite the acknowledgment of various power structures that shape and condition the subjectivities of women migrants, relatively little research has focused on how religion interacts with migrants ' constitution of gender subjectivities, and in particular, how religious resources and ethics enable women migrants to negotiate these multiple inequalities. Migrants ' religious lives not only allow them to imagine alternative subjectivities beyond those normalized by material and discursive power relations, but also provide support and a sense of community that enables them to materially and emotionally settle in new socioeconomic environments (Silvey 2013). The extent to which women ' s subjectivity and agency can be conveyed through and supported by religious ethics and piety, however, is debatable (Mahmood 2005; Braidotti 2008; Vasilaki 2016; Cloke et al. 2019). Religion might open up new spaces for the restoration of spiritual and sacred sources of agency for migrant women and thus reconstruct their subaltern subjectivities, or reproduce the gender- or class-based hierarchies that can thwart their agency (Gao and Qian 2019). Therefore, attention to religious practices can enable a more nuanced understanding of women migrants ' gender subjectivities as malleable and culturally conditioned.

Nilsson and Tesfahuney (2019) noted that religion has not been seriously taken into account in the analysis of women ' s subjectivities and agency, as ' the traditional and the religious have been equated with female oppression, patriarchy and hierarchy ' (2). In response, the postsecular turn in feminism calls for a critical rethinking of religion, gender, and the secular, beyond secularist accounts of religion as a space that restricts women ' s agency, as well as the assumption of women ' s agency in terms of emancipatory and resisting subjects (Mahmood 2005; Braidotti 2008; Vasilaki 2016). This emerging approach of postsecular feminism has prioritized religious ethics as an important impetus that brings forth an alternative notion of the feminine self and feminist consciousness beyond the femininity defined by the ethos of secularism (Mahmood 2005; Braidotti 2008; Vasilaki 2016). In this regard, the feminist scholar Braidotti (2008) proposed a ' non-oppositional ' understanding of woman ' s agency that contests the normative liberal-feminist assumption that agency primarily manifests in practices of resisting or subverting social norms. In other words, women ' s agency can also be achieved through strategically reconstituting their subjectivities by drawing on existing cultural resources rather than socially, ethically, or political opposing hegemonic norms. Mahmood (2005) therefore emphasized the ethical formation of religious agency, arguing that ' agentival capacity is entailed not only in those acts that resist norms but also in the multiple ways in which one inhabits norms ' (15). Nevertheless, research on gender and religion should abandon a zero-sum stance with a simple dichotomy between domination and resistance that omits the complex and ambiguous relationship between gender and religion.

The ' postsecular turn ' that moves toward an affective and ethical engagement with religion, though, might also risk adopting an apolitical account of religion per se, overlooking religion as ideologies that sustain women ' s ' natural ' status (Vasilaki 2016). For instance, in Ammerman ' s (1987) study of a North American conservative Christian community, ' most women learn to influence family decision making while still deferring to their husbands ' authority, and that both they and their husbands find ways to live with the tension between Fundamentalist norms for

family structure and modern norms of individuality and equality ' (146). In general, there is still a theoretical tension that researchers seek to discern the ' progressive ' and ' dark ' sides of religion and how they have different effects on women ' s subjectivities.

To overcome this theoretical difficulty, this article advances a postsecular feminism by introducing an intersectional approach to women ' s religious subjectivities. Intersectionality explores how different categories and social inequalities (e.g., gender, race, and class) mutually form one another in a way that constitutes a ' matrix of domination ' or new ontological conditions that cannot be challenged by singular antioppression power (Collins 2002; Cho, Crenshaw, and McCall 2013). Methodologically, developing an intersectional approach to religious subjectivities requires focusing on multiple categorizations as well as the relational, contextualized, and mutually constitutive nature of social dominations (Hopkins 2019). Here, McCall ' s (2005) conceptualization of the three dimensions of intersectionality -namely anticategorical, intracategorical, and intercategorical complexities -offers crucial insights for exploring the religious subjectivity of women migrants. Whereas anticategorical complexity provides a poststructural deconstruction of analytical categories and the inequalities they sustain, intracategorical complexity aims to examine ' particular social groups at neglected points of intersection [ … and] to reveal the complexity of lived experience within such groups ' (McCall 2005, 1773). The idea of intercategorical complexity attends to the ' relationships of inequality among social groups and changing configurations of inequality along multiple and conflicting dimensions ' (McCall 2005, 1773).

Drawing on the theoretical advances of intersectionality (McCall 2005; Collins 2019), we suggest that intersectionality can help us reflect on postsecular feminism in two ways. First, theorizing women ' s religious agency as a process of ethical formation (Mahmood 2005) needs to be understood within the existential intersectional condition in which religion is felt, inhabited, and performed. This is in line with the recent theoretical shift of intersectionality studies away from identity politics to a structural critique of power (Singh 2015). In other words, an intersectional approach not only acknowledges the multiple layers of identity and their politics but also discerns the intersectional structure and process that produce domination and (religious) identity. In particular, although different forms of inequalities can mutually constitute one another, McCall (2005) also argued that ' some forms of inequality seem to arise from the same conditions that might reduce other forms ' (1791). That is, the intersections of some social inequalities might be more ontological in structuring the effects of other social experiences. In this sense, we do not simply look at the religious institutions and practices themselves, but delve into the intersectional system of powers, which serves as an ontological condition through which individuals interpret, use, or inhabit religion. As we show in this article, the intersection of class-based exploitation and state power structures other categorizations of religion and gender.

Second, intersectionality is not a fixed power structure but also implies a process of becoming that might open up spaces of ethical aspiration and existential freedom that cut against the social inequalities (Collins 2019). As Collins (2019) revealed, ' The idea of intersectionality works in multiple registers of recognizing the significance of social structural arrangements of power, how individual and group experiences reflect those structural intersections, and how political marginality might engender new subjectivities and agency ' (26). In this vein, religious agency cannot be simply defined or captured in a singular way; instead, it is more likely to be a relation of emergence , where new religious subjectivities emerge from the interaction among different forms of lived experience in particular sociospatial conditions. In this article, although not necessarily functioning as a resisting force, the intersection of religion, class, and gender nonetheless help women migrants reclaim the intimate within the matrix of dominations. This theorization therefore can help have a broader horizon of ethical-political concerns and postsecular possibilities beyond the simplistic division of progressive and dark sides of religion.

## The Study

This article is based on a project that examines the religious subjectivity of Christian rural migrant workers in Shenzhen, China. It deploys an intersectional analytical frame to explore how migrant workers ' religion, gender, age, and class subjectivities mutually shape one another. The field work was conducted between 2014 and 2018 in Shenzhen ' s nine Protestant churches (including state-sanctioned

churches and house or underground churches). We interviewed fifty-two Christian migrant workers (thirty-two males and twenty females) and eight leaders, pastors, and preachers. Although this article primarily draws on the experiences of twenty women migrant workers between the ages of eighteen and forty-six, it also considers the perspectives of male Christians and their non-Christian family members or workmates to provide a relational account of gender subjectivities. The churches that migrant workers attend can be classified as either state-sanctioned or house or underground churches, the latter of which operate without the recognition of the state. The epistemological style of the former is often labeled as evangelism, characterized by a more intellectual and text-centric understanding of Christianity. Although some evangelist churches also operate in an underground manner, the house churches in the city organized by rural Christians often embrace Pentecostal styles that are more emotional and practice-centric (Huang 2014). This distinction is not fixed, however, as migrant workers often attend both types of churches interchangeably.

Methods used in this study included in-depth interviews and participant observation. Following McCall (2005) and Hopkins (2019), who considered story narrative and open interviews as the most effective method to research intersectionality as multiple experiences in subjects ' everyday lives, we use these methods to provide spaces for participants to freely narrate the social divisions most significant to them. The first author also followed Christian migrant workers ' everyday routines and practices in their churches, factories, and living spaces and participated in sermon sessions and fellowships inside and outside the churches. The third author closely traced the life trajectory of women migrant workers and their marginalized experiences during the process of out-migration. Each interview lasted between forty minutes and three hours. All the informant names appearing in the article are pseudonyms.

## From Rural Women to Migrant Workers: Negotiating the Intersectional ' Matrix of Domination '

In this section, we consider how Christian women migrant workers are subject to different forms of social oppression, including state power, the legacies of both Confucian familial and patriarchal culture, the disciplined labor regime under global capitalism, religious regulation, and urban -rural dualism, which mutually shape one another and constitute an intersectional ' matrix of domination ' (Collins 2002). This intersectional matrix of domination is scalar, actualizing the regulatory power of the state and global capitalism into women ' s sacrificed, docile, and disciplined bodies; translocal, extending the oppressions from rural society to the cities; and interlocking, with different forms of inequalities mutually constituting one another. We argue that these systemic forms of social inequality serve an existential condition of being in which women migrant workers constitute their religious subjectivities.

## Christian Women in Rural Society

In imperial Chinese society, the cultural legitimacy of the state and the political system were based on ideal Confucianism moral codes that emphasized the ' proper ' order and hierarchy of the family and ' the moral training of obedient, filial subjects ' (Johnson 2009, 2). Women ' s submission to men was normalized as one of the ' three cardinal guides ' ( sangang , 三 纲 ) including ' ruler guides subject, ' ' father guides son, ' and ' husband guides wife. ' When the Chinese Communist Party came to power in 1949, they claimed that the socialist revolution had released rural women from ' feudal ' oppression within both the Confucian familial hierarchy and society as a whole. During the communist era from the 1950s to the 1970s, peasant women were actually endowed with a relatively high social status in the ideologies of the party-state, as peasants were viewed to stand in alignment with the urban working class at the vanguard of the socialist revolution. In particular, peasant women were even hailed as ' holding up half the sky, ' which epitomized a Marxist representation of feminism and the efforts to mobilize women into socialist construction (Fan 2007; Jacka 2013). In essence, the Maoist state scarcely challenged patriarchy because, as Hershatter (2007) noted, Maoist gender ideologies focused on the sameness between men and women rather than women ' s social expectations and circumstances per se.

Since the launch of reform and opening-up in the late 1970s, China ' s rural areas have undergone drastic social and economic changes as the state adopted a set of pragmatic policies such as marketization and decollectivization to release individuals ' productive

agency. Chief among these policies that profoundly affected rural societies was the introduction of the household responsibility system (HRS), which indicated the collapse of communal production. Despite the fact that the post-Mao reform policies substantially improved agricultural productivity and peasants ' quality of life, they have indeed reinforced rather than diminished patriarchy and gender inequality (Xu 2000; Fan 2003). First, gender ideology in the post-Mao state appeared to retreat from a symbolic gender-equality agenda to instead focus on economic growth. Now, peasants, and particularly peasant women, were depicted as ' backward ' and low suzhi (quality), and were viewed as a barrier to China ' s project of modernization (Jacka 2013). Second, the release of households from communes facilitated by the HRS also signified the restoration of deep-rooted patriarchal power dynamics in the peasant household. As Fan (2003) suggested, ' rather than being part of a commune, the wife is now likely to be subordinate to the husband as he takes on the role of the household head when negotiating with village authorities ' (289). Overall, the post-Mao reform did not substantially undermine the domination of women in history, but rather reformulated them in a new mixture.

Fang, a thirty-four-year-old Christian rural migrant woman, reflected on her lived experiences in the countryside where her family had not allowed her to go to primary school until she was nine years old, because she had to take care of her younger brothers until they were able to walk. In spite of her strong academic performance at school, Fang was forced to drop out of education at the age of thirteen because her family had to find money for the education of her two younger brothers. She said, ' My father told me, ' You have two younger brothers who need to attend school. Just come back, it is useless for a girl to have too much education. '' This phenomenon is common among the woman migrant workers in this research, who stopped pursuing an education during the ages between thirteen and eighteen. Regardless of whether they willingly quit school or were forced to by their family, this responded to the traditional patriarchal ideology that discourages investment in girls and thwarts women ' s achievement of personal goals. Like many other young women who became ' surplus labor ' in the countryside, Fang left the village to pursue work as a migrant at the age of sixteen. Although Fang became a worker in the city, she dutifully sent her earnings to her rural family until she married to support her two younger brothers ' education. Fang was subject to a gendered expectation of being a ' filial daughter ' who is more tolerant and thus should make sacrifices for the family (Bauer et al. 1992). In the patrilineal tradition, daughters are expected to eventually become the daughter-in-law of another family. Thus, it is normally a filial duty for young migrant women to offer financial support to their family to repay their parents ' expenses in raising them.

Since the mid-1980s, one noticeable aspect of the rural Christian revival is the fact that the majority of rural Christians are women (Fiedler 2010). Women ' s conversion to Christianity can partly be attributed to the insecurities and hardships of rural life and especially women ' s subordinate status, which push them to seek refuge in God (Fiedler 2010). The prevalence and active role of women in rural Christian congregations are particularly manifest in the notion of ' sisterhood ' prevailing in many rural churches, which helps women maintain social networks. Some scholars therefore view the embrace of Christianity as an emancipatory force that empowers rural women believers (Hunter and Chan 2007).

Yet, notwithstanding that Christian communities in the countryside might somewhat empower women Christians, we suggest that rural Christian women ' s religious experiences often interact with and are mutually constituted by other forms of oppression in rural society including Confucian hegemony, patriarchy, and state control of religion, which combine to subordinate Christian women. On the one hand, rural Christian women struggled to be ' filial daughters ' or ' good wives ' under the expectations of traditional patriarchal culture and to be devout Christian women following God ' s will. Despite the noticeable revival of Christianity, Christians still constitute less than 8 percent of the overall rural population. In other words, Christian believers are still a religious minority group in the face of an overwhelming patriarchal lineage and culture and Confucianism-based ancestor worship in rural society. The Christian faith is always incompatible with and unaccepted by ancestor worship or other folk religions in terms of religious doctrines and rituals. For example, many devout Christian women might refuse to offer sacrifices and burn incense for the ancestors of a family or lineage community, as they

think of this kind of ' idolatry ' as going against Christian doctrine. In turn, many non-Christian villagers view Christian rituals as representing a great offense to their lineage culture. Moreover, Church activities and particularly Sunday worship distract women ' s focus from the household and agricultural work, which other non-Christian family members would often be unhappy about. Xueyi, a twenty-fiveyear-old Christian woman migrant worker, reflected on how the Christian faith was suppressed by the patriarchs in her family. In Xueyi ' s family, her mother and grandmother were both devout Christians, but her grandfather strongly objected to their Christian faith. As she recalled:

Xueyi: My grandfather didn ' t believe in Christianity. He really disliked Christians. At that time, he even burned my grandmother ' s Bibles, quite a few. He had strong lineage values. Every time he found my grandmother went to congregations, he would get angry and scold my grandmother.

Researcher: Why was he angry?

Xueyi: Because there were men and women in the church. He thought this was quite improper. He couldn ' t understand why they sing and pray, why the men and women sit together. Many people of older generations despised this.

From this quotation, it is evident that Christian women in rural society experience marginalization not only due to the patriarchal structure but also because of their identification as a ' religious minority ' within Confucianism-based social norms. Furthermore, this oppression extends into the religious institutions themselves. Underneath the ' Christian fever ' is the underground evangelizing movement operating outside of the official surveillance of the state. Many rural underground churches were particularly dedicated to sending church members to do missionary work in cities or villages elsewhere, some of which even claimed to ' occupy the city, ' an organizational strategy in a manner similar to the spread of early Chinese Communist Party ideas in a hostile political environment (Koesel 2013). Christian women and especially young Christian girls, however, were more likely to be sent by rural churches to the front of the ' evangelizing battle. ' Four of twenty participants mentioned their experiences of evangelization when they were young. In this sense, the patriarchal power often interacts with the rural Christian institutions that are dominated by male pastors. For example, after Fang quit school, the local church sponsored her to learn theology and Korean in preparation for missionary work that would be undertaken in Korean ethnic areas in northeast China. She recalled how she was sent to evangelization in the name of ' devoting to god ' :

The elder [a male church leader] of the church said he wanted me to be devoted to god [ fengxian chuqu , 奉 献 出 去 ]. So, they raised money for me and sent me to study theology. It was tough at that time, you had to go to remote mountains to study [beyond the reach of state surveillance]. … To evangelize the villagers, we often climbed several mountains and slept there overnight.

Moreover, the state ' s strict controls on religion further facilitated the oppression of rural Christian women, putting them in dangerous and vulnerable situations. Another Christian woman, Lijun, had to escape into the mountains when the police detected that she was evangelizing. She recalled, ' One time I escaped into the mountains with another girl -we two girls were extremely scared and didn ' t dare to leave the mountains until midnight. ' Fang and Lijun ' s experiences reveal that the deep-rooted patriarchy in rural society and the state ' s religion control structure the way religious institutions operate, therefore expecting women to be more tolerant and self-sacrificing. In this sense, the intersection of state regulation and patriarchy in rural society actually facilities the gender inequalities within religious institutions.

## Christian Women Under the Urban Migrant Labor Regime

As the existing literature has documented, when Chinese rural women migrants migrate to cities in search of dagong (employed work, 打 工 ), they might attain a liberating sense of autonomy from familial patriarchy and a urban modern identity (Pun 2005; N. Zhang 2014). This does not mean, however, that migration necessarily empowers rural migrant women, as they are absorbed into a larger ' matrix of domination ' woven by the state and global capitalism. Influenced by China ' s hukou system (household registration system), the gender inequalities were translocally extended from rural society into the masculine process of global capitalism (Mountz and Hyndman 2006).

First, becoming dagongmei (working sisters) or women workers is a process of self-subjectivization in which migrant women refashion themselves as modern, disciplined working subjects (Pun 1999, 2005). Chief among this politics of identification is to discard a peasant identity and embrace urban modernity, including ' proper ' behavior as defined by the factory management. This is particularly evident in Foxconn, the world ' s largest manufacturing company, where they deployed a set of disciplinary techniques such as intensive prework training, strict surveillance, monetary punishment, and verbal abuse, to refashion rural migrant women ' s rural lifestyles as ' modern ' docile laboring subjects. In this sense, the factory labor regime actually worked hand in hand with the state ' s hegemonic discourses that degrade rural women as low-quality, backward, and uncivilized bodies. For example, as participants reported, the managers would often give lectures to them regarding the imperatives to discard ' bad habits ' from the countryside, such as acting casually and lacking discipline, when they were newly recruited into Foxconn. When I asked Xueyi, a thirty-two-year-old Christian worker, how she thought of the managers ' lecture, she recognized it as reasonable because she thought migrant women should adapt to the city. Although Xueyi did not necessarily accept the state ' s representation of rural women as low quality and backward, she acknowledged that refashioning certain rural habits and adhering to factory regulations was a necessary strategy for survival in new environments:

It depends on where you are. If you come back to the countryside, you need to adapt to the rural lifestyle. If you go to the city, you can ' t only take a shower every few days like you do in the village. You need to adapt to the lifestyle here, take a shower every day, make yourself tidy, queue up in the canteen … You need to be especially cautious, behave well, and be professional [ jingye , 敬 业 ] in your work.

Second, under the factory labor regime, and particularly in the collective factory dormitory system tightly interwoven with the just-in-time production model, women migrant workers were intentionally largely atomized as isolated subjects and were deprived of emotional support from family and friends. Many of the participants in this study complained that the intensive workloads and work schedules constantly shuffled them from day to night shifts, with little daily interaction with friends and workmates possible. Even roommates in the same dormitory could hardly ever meet each other if they worked different shifts. Married couples were separated in different dormitories strictly segregated between men and women. For example, a twentyeight-year-old Christian woman worker, Lili, described the feelings of loneliness and isolation she faced at Foxconn:

There was one time I got cold because of the intensive workload. So, do you know what? I just realized that no dormmates cared about me. There were four people in our dormitory. I had moved in two weeks before, but nobody really knew me, and neither did I know them. Because I worked on day shifts, I only saw them sleeping when I came back at night. So, we scarcely had any communication. … I have several friends, all my colleagues, but we are tied up by the work and seldom meet one another.

According to Lili ' s narrative, woman migrant workers ' social ties seem to be cruelly severed as socialization activities were minimized. This exploitative logic was essentially an effort to structure workers ' lives in the holistic sense of service to the goal of profit maximization.

Third, under the hierarchical management at Foxconn, migrant women workers were victims of double repressions inflicted by both hierarchical and patriarchal power. The migrant labor regime does not simply target a general body but also a specifically sexed and feminine body. At Foxconn, a popular phrase among the workers is that ' women are treated as men, and men as animals. ' Moreover women, and especially rural women workers, were imagined to be easier to regulate and control in comparison with rebellious and aggressive male workers in Foxconn who integrate militarized and masculine culture in management. As a result, although many male production workers were verbally humiliated by their managers when they made mistakes; they, in turn, constructed their masculinity both through confrontational practices against managers and in claiming superiority over women workers. As the participants remarked, it was common for male managers or production workers to overtly ' talk dirty ' and make sexual jokes and flirt with women workers in the workshops. In some cases, offensive language turned into sexual harassment, such as touching women ' s bodies. This verbal violence and sexual harassment were viewed as natural by men, however. If the women tried to complain and resist, they would be viewed by male workers or managers

as ' too serious ' and as someone who ' can ' t take a joke. ' In this sense, the masculine and hierarchical management in the urban factory system therefore situates women migrants into both class-based and gender inequalities.

## Women ' s Religious Agency and the Politics of Piety

In this section, we further elaborate on how Protestant ethics and ways of life enable women migrants to reclaim agency and intimate spaces in workplace, church, and family. We observe variegated forms of agency emerging at the intersection of religion, gender, class, and family. These forms of agency can be counterpatriarchal, asserting women ' s intimate and sacred spaces, or ethical-spiritual and nonconfrontational, manifesting as a docile, submissive, and pious femininity. These seemingly ' contradictory ' forms of agency often interweave with one another and cannot be reduced merely to religious strategies or ethical subject formation. They are instead a relation of emergence within the intersectional matrix.

## Revisioning Class Exploitation

Although Christian women migrants cannot challenge the exploitative labor regime coproduced by the state and global capitalism, Protestant discourses and teachings provide them not only a horizon to revise and reframe the exploitative experiences but also an ethics of the self that enables them to become virtuous and faithful subjects. For Foucault (1988), ethics involves not simply codes of principles or rules regarding ' right ' or ' good ' for action but are a matter of self-relation. Although ethical self-constitution is conditioned by moral codes, Foucault (1988) understood ' ethics ' as ' the kind of relationship you ought to have with yourself ' , and ' how the individual is supposed to constitute himself as a moral subject of his own actions ' (263). For Christian migrant women, their relations to work and workplace are part and parcel of their project of self-transformation into valued faithful Christian subjects. Therefore, Christian migrant women actively constructed their Christian femininity by performing an image of being kind, hard-working, helpful, and reliable in the workplace. For example, when I asked Yangyi, a thirtyfour-year-old Christian worker, regarding how she made sense of the work and what she liked or disliked about her job at Foxconn, she replied that she could not tolerate those who did not take their work seriously:

I dislike those who don ' t take responsibility for their work and disregard the job you do. If you ask me to loaf on the job, I can ' t, and neither will I do that. You know, what we Christians do is for God ultimately. At least, I ensure that my work should be done in the right way and weigh the salaries I received.

For Yangyi, being diligent in her work in tandem with Protestant morality enabled her to achieve a virtuous Christian subject that offered her moral superiority over non-Christian workers. It is therefore no wonder that Christian workers, and especially woman Christian workers, were conceived of as ' good people ' in the eyes of their colleagues. Another 28-year-old woman migrant, Liu, recognized that there were certainly class inequality and exploitation within the factory, but she also highlighted that working is itself a Christian ' s benfen (duty) and a means to glorify God:

The matter was ultimately about how you saw yourself in the face of the hardship in the factory. … For a Christian, the purpose of work is to glorify the Lord. If you have this attitude, you can remain peaceful despite the hardship.

The teaching that the purpose of work is to glorify God is widely accepted by migrant workers who regard themselves as ' God ' s workers, ' meaning that they are working for God, not for the factory or the people who employ them. It is because of this kind of relation that, for many migrant workers, the domain of work is not so much a material power structure but rather an ethics of how they act in relation to God (such as having the proper attitude toward work in line with Protestant ethics and theology). Yangyi and Liu ' s understanding of work reflected the Protestant ethic that ' it was not what the believer did but the commitment with which she or he did it that determined the spiritual quality of an action ' (Abbey 2014, 90).

Apart from performing the Protestant work ethics of benfen , Christian women migrant workers often view their resilience and tolerance of hardship and exploitation as a means to transform themselves into faithful Christian subjects. For many Christian workers, complaints or quarrels with line managers in the workplace are viewed as signs of losing control over one ' s flesh , which God would be displeased with. For

example, 27-year-old Tianli considered the disciplinary regulation in the factories as God ' s training. It is through the proper management of the flesh that she could establish a personal and intimate relationship with Christ:

A true Christian shouldn ' t complain and his [or her] life and should be always positive. You need to understand God ' s work and why he did this for you. Everything has a reason, so I could get benefits from the difficulties and bad circumstances I encountered. For example, the line-leaders always scold you, it is perhaps God ' s test that can help you shape your personality. I used to have a very bad temper, but now I have become very gentle. That ' s because I defeated the environment around me and defeated the flesh that took over me. It ' s ultimately the relationship with Christ but rather the relationship with the world.

According to this quotation, Protestant ethics enables women migrants to constitute a new self-relation by transforming themselves as ' a moral subject of his own actions ' (Foucault 1988, 263). In such circumstances, the Protestant ethics that emphasize benfen (duty) and the transcendent nature of work are partially integrated into the state and capitalist project of the production of docile and productive bodies. If we consider religious agency as resisting subject in a secularist and liberal perspective, Christian ethics are more likely to justify the exploitative regime and thwart migrant workers ' struggling impulses with moral discipline (Thompson 1963). Women migrant workers, however, are subject to an intersectional ' matrix of domination ' that they are not able to alter or not ethically responsible to challenge. Given this ontological condition of being, women migrants ' ethical formation at least mediates how class exploitation is translated, embodied, and affectively felt in the domain of everyday life, and thereby contribute to a virtuous and faithful subject that psychologically empowered them. In other words, the agency of women migrants must be understood within the intersectional dynamics where Protestant ethics mediate the experience and actualization of class-based power.

## Constructing Women ' s ' Comfort Zone '

In contrast to oppressive factory life in which women were atomized as isolated subjects and were deprived of emotional support, the church offers a sense of relative freedom and emotional support for migrant women. Many Christian women conceive of their churches as places in which they can unleash their feelings, talk freely to fellow believers, and express private emotions that they do not share elsewhere. For example, Xiaoyue, a thirty-six-year-old woman at Guanlan Church, mentioned the women ' s fellowship, which offered her a ' comfort zone ' to confide about her distress inflicted by family conflicts and work, while she was ashamed to share such feelings elsewhere. Attending the church, however, could help her temporarily fence off the distress and enter a state of being ' free ' and ' belonging to God ' :

When stepping into the church, I can put aside all my distress and joyfully participate in it. When I was working, I always felt unhappy. I would think I was at such an old age already but had achieved nothing. But in the church, I feel quite relaxed. The brothers and sisters often encourage me, and I constantly remind myself I ' m joyful, I ' m free, I ' m healthy, and I ' m belonging to God.

Women ' s perception of churches as a ' comfort zone, ' though, is often constituted through particular religious rituals such as prayer and testimony. Through these practices, women workers can express their hardships and unfair treatment before God, thereby gaining a sense of comfort. For example, the twenty-seven-year-old woman worker Lijuan conceived of prayer as a crucial way to attain inner peace, because through praying she could submit herself to God who, as she believed, would bear the distress for her:

There was one time the line head scolded me harshly. I felt really upset. I didn ' t even want to eat anything, because all I ate was tasteless. But my mind suddenly turned to God -I should go to the church and pray before God. Lord, it ' s not my fault [the mistakes in the work], please testify for me, please bring justice for me. After I prayed for a while in the church, I gradually felt peaceful. … If I solely rely on myself, it ' s useless regardless of how great the efforts I ' ve made. You can ' t solve any problem by relying on your own mind.

Moreover, migrant women also actively construct a feminized space characterized by embodied practices and emotional narratives of Christianity that bear the legacy of a Pentecostal-style charismatic Protestantism (or in Chinese terminology ling-en pai , 灵 恩 派 ). The Pentecostal-charismatic Protestantism, which places the Spirit gifts at the center of belief and practice, had long prevailed in China ' s countryside, operating beyond the state-sanctioned theological

system. This Protestant movement has been transplanted into house churches in Shenzhen, however, and reconstituted into a religious style that accommodates women workers ' feelings and autonomy, especially their requests for lived, affective, and embodied religiosity. On the contrary, the state-sanctioned churches often identified themselves as urban evangelists and therefore followed a highly institutionalized structure that emphasized religious hierarchy, theological knowledge, and formal training. They are often based on a gender division of religious participation in which men have greater responsibility for leading worship and preaching whereas women tend to undertake more responsibilities associated with evangelization (Kao 2009). For example, the chief pastors of Shenzhen ' s twenty-seven official churches were all men, with only a few women entering the hierarchy in these churches. The situation is quite different in some house churches we visited, though. For example, the Pentecostalism-dominant churches like Foxconn House Churches A and C often prioritize feelings and emotional experience, such as healing and the experience of the Holy Spirit, over religious hierarchy and orthodox theological vocabulary.

It is noteworthy that emotionally laden narratives are often shaped by women and in particular rural migrant women. According to observations at these house churches, rural migrant women primarily make sense of their religious activities and commitment to God through embodied practices such as sharing experiences of the miraculous healing of their bodies or God empowering them to survive their everyday difficulties. For example, in the prayer meeting of Foxconn House Church A that takes place every Wednesday evening, participants would kneel around in a circle to say their prayers, and women are intuitively the leading actors in this ritual, who can bring a joyful atmosphere to an emotional climax. The joy arising from these occasions is usually expressed via women ' s passionate prayers with shouting and tears. Liyun was a thirty-six-year-old rural migrant woman at Foxconn who was overwhelmed by the distress caused by her husband ' s addiction to gambling and irresponsibility toward his family. For Liyun, however, prayer with tears offered her an emotional channel to release her distress:

Liyun: When I first came to Shenzhen, it was a tough time. I felt touched every time I went to the congregation. I even cried every time when I prayed with other Christian fellows during that time.

Especially when I accepted the Holy Communion, I was almost crying my eyes out.

Researcher: What made you so touched?

Liyun: I was thinking there was nothing in the ' world ' worth my addiction. Only God and Christian fellows were reliable. I said, Lord, I submit anything of myself to you, life or death, blessing or curse. I said, even I and my husband will divorce or anything, I don ' t care anymore.

Another strongly feminine symbolic act was the introduction of the ' square dance ' ( Guangchang Wu 广 场 舞 ) into Foxconn House Church C for entertainment, particularly for women workers. In China, Guangchang Wu is often viewed as a grassroots form of dancing conducted in a public square, and is popular among middle-aged and elderly women. Therefore, the pastor recruited a professional dancer to modify Guangchang Wu and attributed it a new meaning; namely, ' gospel dance. ' At 8 p.m. every Saturday evening, approximately twenty women workers (with a few male workers) would gather to dance for one hour.

Overall, in these house churches of the Pentecostal style, women ' s religiosity reframes the institutional spheres where men have traditionally been dominant, therefore creating intimate spaces for women workers to reclaim their religious and gendered agency. This is consistent with Woodhead ' s (2001) observation that the ' emphasis on the authority of feeling, intuition, and experience in religious matters empowers women to attain a spiritual and institutional power denied them elsewhere ' (71). In this sense, the intersection of gender and religion facilitates women migrants in reclaiming ' the intimate, ' a space where the experience of class-based exploitation is recontextualized, and the patriarchal structures within religious institutions are challenged.

## Christianizing Family Relations

For feminist scholars, the family is not only a structure of inequality in which various powers contest, but it also epitomizes the institutionalized ways in which broader ideologies and socially constructed meanings are enacted and reproduced (Lloyd, Few, and Allen 2009). As we have noted, the Christian migrant women were suffering from multiple marginalization inflicted by patriarchy and the exclusion from the dominance of familial or lineage culture.

As a cultural minority group, Christian migrant women need to reconcile the tensions of not only gender relations but also cultural conflicts with nonChristian family members. Christian migrant women, however, are capable of negotiating these marginalizations by endeavoring to create Christianized family relations and therefore gaining some empowerment within the family. Chief among these strategies of Christianization is establishing Christian marriage and converting non-Christian family members.

First, like male Christian migrants, women migrant workers also pursue a ' blessed ' Christian marriage. In the interviews, no matter whether they were single Christians (six of twenty), women with Christian husbands or boyfriends (nine of twenty), or married women with non-Christian husbands (five of twenty), all insisted that an ideal marital relationship was based on common Christian faith. When I asked Xiaohong, a twenty-six-year-old woman, about what kind of ideal marital relationship she aspired to, she explained with reference to Matthew (19:4 -6) in the Bible: ' [Husband and wife] are no longer two, but one flesh. Therefore what God has joined together, let no one separate. ' Xiaohong emphasized that an ideal marital relationship should be to be ' joined together ' by God so that the couple could achieve ' a spirit of unity ' ( 同 心 合 一 , tongxin heyi ) and therefore be less likely to separate in comparison with non-Christian couples. What I want to emphasize, though, here is that Christian women ' s imagination of godly marriage morally justified their struggle for autonomy in marriage from their parents. Xiaohong ' s parents had match-made a potential spouse for her, but she refused to return to the village to attend the xiangqin (blind date, 相 亲 ). She told me that her parents cared more about how much benefit and particularly betrothal gifts ( caili , 彩 礼 ) they could get than her own happiness if she married the man they arranged for. Most important, as she said, she was not willing to find a waibangren (foreigner, referring to a nonChristian) as her husband in spite of her resistance that irritated her parents. Xiaohong eventually found a Christian husband who she knew in the fellowship at Foxconn House Church A. Xiaohong ' s husband also devoutly believed in privilege of godly marriage. He said: ' Marriage is a gift from God, it is not to find someone to continue the family line ( 传 宗 接 代 ). ' Xiaohong ' s story was not unique, as finding a spouse at church was quite a common phenomenon according to my observations. Interestingly, many churches not only encourage marriage between believers but serve as ' marriage agents ' for young Christian workers. In this sense, by drawing on Christian relationships, the migrant women attained a certain sense of agency to establish a type of marriage to which they aspired.

Second, for Christian migrant women, evangelizing among their non-Christian family members is another strategy that might improve their status in the family. For Christian women, evangelizing is not only the duty of a Christian that brings glory to God but also a way to make their situation in the family more ' habitable ' in a practical sense. The interviews show that it was usually women who first converted to Christianity before converting their husbands and other family members. All twenty women participants in this research have experiences of preaching to their family members. Among nine women with Christian husbands or boyfriends, four of them had successfully converted their spouses and the others were themselves already Christians. All five married women with non-Christian husbands had been trying to convert their husbands.

The most common trajectory of evangelization often started with husbands and mothers-in-law, then targeted other female relatives and then male relatives, although Christian women would readjust their strategies in accordance with relatives ' susceptibility to the ' gospel. ' Evangelization is also a process accompanied by cultural conflicts and misunderstandings, however. For example, forty-two-year-old Lijun said that her husband could not understand her Christian faith at the beginning: ' When he heard me saying prayers, ' Jesus, you ' re the love of my life, ' he was jealous of Jesus and thought I was crazy. ' Lijun gradually resolved her husband ' s misunderstandings and eventually converted him by enacting an image of a good Christian wife. As Lijun said, her husband felt that she became softer and more passionate and tolerant after converting to Christianity and therefore he believed that having Christian faith was a good thing. Lijun sincerely admitted that their intimate relations had substantially improved, as she explained: ' When you submit yourself to God, He will relighten your life, let your life shine again. '

Apart from the husband, a mother-in-law is an equally important target for evangelization. In Chinese family life, the daughter-in-law and mother-

in-law relationship, which scholars often depict as inherently conflictual (Stacey 1983), is crucial in determining the harmony of family life. As Shih and Pyke (2010) argued, the contentiousness of this inlaw dyad is associated with ' Confucian values of filial piety and respect and gender hierarchies that obligate the daughter-in-law to serve and defer to the mother-in-law and that place both women in a subordinated position, pitting them against one another as they vie for more individual power ' (334). Against this backdrop, I suggest that evangelization could enable migrant women to establish a Christian alliance of daughterand mother-in-law that might extend to other women family members, who can thus collectively reformulate gendered power relations. This can be illustrated by the story of Xiaochen, a forty-six-year-old rural migrant woman who married into an urban family. In the first few years of her marriage, she had been harshly treated by her mother-in-law because of her identification as both a rural woman and Christian. Her status substantially improved, however, after she successfully converted her mother-in-law, husband, and sisters-in-law:

I converted to Christianity at nineteen and got married at twenty-five. When I first married into my husband ' s family, my mother-in-law very much disliked my Christian identification and discriminated against me because I was a rural woman. But thanks to God, when they discriminated against me, I didn ' t give up. I had always prayed and followed God ' s will. During the toughest times, my tears wet three pillows altogether, but God has always loved me. … With God ' s blessing, I started a small business in 2001. I worked hard and brought a public house in 2003. God always blesses me and He gave me a pretty daughter and a pretty son subsequently. … Now, I have led my mother-in-law and husband to the church, bringing them to God. I am delighted I didn ' t give up before. Now, they all treat me well, like a noblewoman. My mother-in-law even cooked for me.

It is noteworthy that evangelization is never achieved through the ' hard sell ' of Christian theology but rather through migrant women ' s performance as docile, tolerant, hard-working Christian wives that gradually transforms family members ' understanding of Christianity.

Additionally, Christian migrant women also draw on churches and ' supernatural forces ' (e.g., healing and exorcism) to help them evangelize, especially in cases of disease and difficulties with family members.

When their relatives became ill, the migrant women would usually organize Christians to visit and pray for the patients at home or in the hospital. One of the most common rituals during these visits was the Christian women ' s performance of faith healing with patients as a complement to medical treatment. Christian women ' s relatives were normally willing to accept this healing or exorcism, and many Chinese people request divine assistance to resolve dilemmas despite not necessarily having any formal religious faith. In comparison with Buddhism, Taoism, and folk religions, however, in Christian healing there is no need to pay for rituals or to donate to temples as is widespread in the increasingly commercialized traditional belief systems (Gao and Qian 2019). In some cases, the church fellows would make donations for those with serious illnesses. Therefore, Christian women ' s evangelization was often conceived of by their ill relatives as not only an expression of care and emotional support but also a spiritual act that might possibly cure the disease based on confidence in the efficacy of prayer. The visit did not aim to successfully convert ill relatives in a short time, but rather, as they claimed, to plant ' Christian seeds ' in the patients ' minds. For example, the twenty-seven-year-old Christian migrant woman Liufang converted her father-in-law, sister, and sister-in-law by providing regular care, material help, and spiritual healing:

My father-in-law converted after his leg injury caused by an accident. Although I didn ' t have many savings, I paid for my father ' s medical expenses. I prayed in front of my father. I prayed for twenty days. His surgical operation was very successful. He said he didn ' t experience any suffering. So, he finally accepted my gospel.

Overall, Christian migrant women ' s efforts to Christianize the family did not subvert patriarchal power and traditional familial values, as their performance as good Christian wives and daughters-in-law during evangelization sometimes overlapped with the ethics of filial piety and submission based on the family hierarchy. Women ' s religious agency, however, cannot be solely defined in terms of a resisting subjectivity. In this study, submission and being docile is not only a process of self-cultivation into a pious way of life that might spiritually empower them, but is also an integral part of the tactic that redefines familial power and relationships. To some degree, this also enables women migrants to

challenge the hierarchical, Confucianism-based family structure by establishing new familial relations founded on spiritual intimacy.

## Conclusion

This article has examined the formation of Christian migrant women ' s religious subjectivity and agency under the intersectional ' matrix of domination ' produced by the state, class-based migrant labor regime, patriarchal culture, and religious institutions. This article contributes to feminist studies of religion and migration in two key aspects. First, while supporting existing arguments in feminist studies of migrants that the regulatory powers of the state and global capitalism operate in tandem with patriarchy to shape the feminization of migrant laboring subjects (Silvey 2013), it also demonstrates that structural gender inequalities are often scalar, translocal, and interlocking, serving as ontological conditions that cannot be challenged by singular power. Additionally, drawing on McCall ' s (2005) theorization of intersectionality, this article suggests that some forms of inequality are more structural in conditioning the effects of others. Specifically, state and class-based disciplinary powers are more structural in facilitating gender inequalities in workplaces and within religious institutions. Therefore, it is essential to situate women migrants ' lived experiences within an intersectional framework where different forms of oppression mutually shape and condition one another.

Second, this article contributes to a more nuanced understanding of postsecular feminism by introducing intersectionality in the analysis of women ' s religious agency. We develop a framework of postsecular feminism that transcends the dualism between the positive and negative aspects of religion, and between agency as strategy and agency as ethical formation. In this article, we observe diverse forms of religious agency that can manifest as counterpatriarchal subjects or through docile, tolerant, and self-sacrificial femininity. We move beyond the normative and secular definitions of religious agency that reduce agency solely to resisting actions and countersubjectivity. Christian migrant women ' s performance of religious piety can be understood as a reconstitution of their subaltern femininity that hardly challenges oppressive power at all in many cases. This does not mean, however, that it cannot have counterhegemonic effects. If we differentiate between the political expectations on women workers ' practices and the ethical formation per se, we can achieve a more nuanced understanding of religious agency. Women migrant workers are not morally responsible for nor capable of subverting the intersectional ' matrix of domination ' (Collins 2002). Nevertheless, migrant women ' s religious practices somehow emotionally and socially empower them, although this empowerment is never achieved through a zero-sum game of domination -resistance but rather through compliance and docility. Women ' s religious agency can also be understood ' in terms of ethical formation, particularly in its Foucauldian formulation ' (Mahmood 2005, 32). Yet, it is noteworthy that the strategic and ethical forms of women migrants ' agency are often interwoven with one another, are better understood as a process of becoming and a relation of emergence (Collins 2019) arising from specific intersectional relations. In general, the theory of postsecular feminism should pay heed to multiple intersectional conditions and effects under which women ' s religious agency is created or thwarted.

## Acknowledgments

We are very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments. We would also like to express our sincere gratitude to the research participants during the field work.

## Funding

This research was supported by following grants: Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship by CAST (2022QNRC001); National Natural Science Foundation of China (42201240); and Science and Technology Projects in Guangzhou (2023A04J1983).

## Disclosure Statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

## ORCID

Quan Gao http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5784-6494 Peter Hopkins http://orcid.org/0000-0003-04459217

## References

- Abbey, R. 2014. Charles Taylor . London and New York: Routledge.
- Altay, S., and J. Clark. 2023. ' The city ' s other face ' : Postsecular feminism and the creation of sacred space by women in Kurdish Turkey. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 24 (7):1224 -41. doi: 10.1080/14649365.2022.2052167.
- Ammerman, N. T. 1987. Bible believers: Fundamentalists in the modern world . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
- Bauer, J., W. Feng, N. E. Riley, and X. Zhao. 1992. Gender inequality in urban China: Education and employment. Modern China 18(3):333 -70. doi: 10. 1177/009770049201800304.
- Billo, E., and A. Mountz. 2016. For institutional ethnography: Geographical approaches to institutions and the everyday. Progress in Human Geography 40 (2):199 -220. doi: 10.1177/0309132515572269.
- Braidotti, R. 2008. In spite of the times: The postsecular turn in feminism. Theory, Culture and Society 25 (6):1 -24. doi: 10.1177/0263276408095542.
- Chiu, T. Y., and S. Y. Choi. 2020. The decoupling of legal and spatial migration of female marriage migrants. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 46 (14):2997 -3013. doi: 10.1080/1369183X.2019.1585018.
- Cho, S., K. W. Crenshaw, and L. McCall. 2013. Toward a field of intersectionality studies: Theory, applications, and praxis. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 38 (4):785 -810. doi: 10.1086/669608.
- Cloke, P., C. Baker, C. Sutherland, and A. Williams. 2019. Geographies of postsecularity: Re-envisioning politics, subjectivity and ethics . London and New York: Routledge.
- Collins, P. H. 2002. Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of empowerment . London and New York: Routledge.
- Collins, P. H. 2019. Intersectionality as critical social theory . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Connell, R. 2007. Southern theory: The global dynamics of knowledge in social science . London: Routledge.
- Fan, C. C. 2003. Rural -urban migration and gender division of labor in transitional China. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 27 (1):24 -47. doi: 10.1111/1468-2427.00429.
- Fan, C. C. 2007. China on the move: Migration, the state, and the household . London and New York: Routledge.
- Fiedler, K. 2010. China ' s ' Christianity fever ' revisited: Towards a community-oriented reading of Christian conversions in China. Journal of Current Chinese Affairs 39 (4):71 -109. doi: 10.1177/186810261003900404.
- Foucault, M. 1988. Technologies of the self: A seminar with Michel Foucault . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
- Gaetano, A. M. 2015. Out to work: Migration, gender, and the changing lives of rural women in contemporary China . Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.
- Gaetano, A. M., and S. A. Y. Brenda. 2010. Introduction to the special issue on women and migration in globalizing Asia: Gendered experiences, agency, and activism. International Migration 48 (6):1 -12. doi: 10. 1111/j.1468-2435.2010.00648.x.
- Gao, Q., and P. Hopkins. 2022. Using intersectionality to explore social inequalities amongst Christian family migrants in China. The Geographical Journal 188 (2):177 -89. doi: 10.1111/geoj.12422.
- Gao, Q., and J. Qian. 2019. Migrant workers in an era of religious revival: Industrial capitalism, labour and Christianity in Shenzhen. The China Quarterly 241:62 -86. doi: 10.1017/S0305741019000766.
- G € okar ı ksel, B., and A. Secor. 2015. Post-secular geographies and the problem of pluralism: Religion and everyday life in Istanbul, Turkey. Political Geography 46:21 -30. doi: 10.1016/j.polgeo.2014.10.006.
- Hershatter, G. 2007. Women in China ' s long twentieth century . Oakland: University of California Press.
- Hopkins, P. 2019. Social geography I: Intersectionality. Progress in Human Geography 43 (5):937 -47. doi: 10. 1177/0309132517743677.
- Huang, J. 2014. Being Christians in urbanizing China: The epistemological tensions of the rural churches in the city. Current Anthropology 55 (Suppl. 10):S238 -S247. doi: 10.1086/677882.
- Hunter, A., and K. K. Chan. 2007. Protestantism in contemporary China . Vol. 3. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Jacka, T. 2013. Chinese discourses on rurality, gender and development: A feminist critique. Journal of Peasant Studies 40 (6):983 -1007. doi: 10.1080/03066150.2013. 855723.
- Johnson, K. A. 2009. Women, the family, and peasant revolution in China . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
- Kao, C. Y. 2009. The cultural revolution and the emergence of pentecostal-style Protestantism in China. Journal of Contemporary Religion 24 (2):171 -88. doi: 10.1080/13537900902816657.
- Koesel, K. J. 2013. The rise of a Chinese house church: The organizational weapon. The China Quarterly 215:572 -89. doi: 10.1017/S0305741013000684.
- Lloyd, S. A., A. L. Few, and K. R. Allen. 2009. Handbook of feminist family studies . London: Sage.
- Mahmood, S. 2005. Politics of piety: The Islamic revival and the feminist subject . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- McCall, L. 2005. The complexity of intersectionality. Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society 30 (3):1771 -1800. doi: 10.1086/426800.
- Mollett, S., and C. Faria. 2018. The spatialities of intersectional thinking: Fashioning feminist geographic futures. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 25 (4):565 -77. doi: 10.1080/0966369X.2018.1454404.
- Mountz, A., and J. Hyndman. 2006. Feminist approaches to the global intimate. Women ' s Studies Quarterly 34 (1 -2):446 -63.
- Nawyn, S. J. 2010. Gender and migration: Integrating feminist theory into migration studies. Sociology Compass 4 (9):749 -65. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9020.2010.00318.x.
- Nilsson, M., and M. Tesfahuney. 2019. What space for female subjectivity in the post-secular? Theory, Culture &amp; Society 36 (7 -8):173 -92. doi: 10.1177/ 0263276419873127.
- Ong, A. 2007. Neoliberalism as a mobile technology. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 32 (1):3 -8. doi: 10.1111/j.1475-5661.2007.00234.x.

- Ong, A. 2010. Spirits of resistance and capitalist discipline: Factory women in Malaysia . New York: SUNY Press.
- Pew Research Center. 2011. Global Christianity: A report on the size and distribution of the World ' s Christian population. Pew Research Center, Washington, DC.
- Pratt, G. 2012. Families apart: Migrant mothers and the conflicts of labor and love . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Pun, N. 2005. Made in China: Women factory workers in a global workplace . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Shih, K. Y., and K. Pyke. 2010. Power, resistance, and emotional economies in women ' s relationships with mothersin-law in Chinese immigrant families. Journal of Family Issues 31 (3):333 -57. doi: 10.1177/0192513X09350875.
- Silvey, R. 2004. Power, difference and mobility: Feminist advances in migration studies. Progress in Human Geography 28 (4):490 -506. doi: 10.1191/030913 2504ph490oa.
- Silvey, R. 2013. Political moves: Cultural geographies of migration and difference. In The Wiley-Blackwell companion to cultural geography , ed. N. C. Johnson, R. H. Schein, and J. Winders, 409 -22. London: Wiley.
- Singh, J. 2015. Religious agency and the limits of intersectionality. Hypatia 30 (4):657 -74. doi: 10.1111/ hypa.12182.
- Stacey, J. 1983. The new conservative feminism. Feminist Studies 9 (3):559 -83. doi: 10.2307/3177616.
- Tang, S., J. Zhou, S. Lin, and X. Li. 2022. Where is my home? Sense of home among rural migrant women in contemporary China. Geoforum 129:131 -40. doi: 10. 1016/j.geoforum.2022.01.014.
- Thompson, E. P. 1963. The making of the English working class . London: Victor Gollancz.
- Vasilaki, R. 2016. The politics of postsecular feminism. Theory, Culture and Society 33 (2):103 -23. doi: 10. 1177/0263276415590235.
- Willis, K., and Y. Brenda. 2002. Gendering transnational communities: A comparison of Singaporean and British migrants in China. Geoforum 33 (4):553 -65. doi: 10.1016/S0016-7185(02)00039-8.
- Woodhead, L. 2001. Feminism and the sociology of religion: From gender-blindness to gendered difference. In The Blackwell companion to sociology of religion , ed. R. Fenn, 67 -84. Oxford: Blackwell.
- Xu, F. 2000. Women migrant workers in China ' s economic reform . London: Springer.
- Yeoh, B. S., J. A. Liew, E. L. E. Ho, and S. Huang. 2023. Migrant domestic workers and the household division of intimate labour: Reconfiguring eldercare relations in Singapore. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 30 (5):619 -37. doi: 10.1080/0966369X.2021.1956435
- Zhang, C. Y. 2014. Untangling the intersectional biopolitics of neoliberal globalization: Asia, Asian, and the Asia-Pacific Rim. Feminist Formations 26 (3):167 -96. doi: 10.1353/ff.2014.0030.
- Zhang, N. 2014. Performing identities: Women in rural -urban migration in contemporary China. Geoforum 54:17 -27. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2014.03.006.

QUAN GAO is an Associate Professor in the School of Geography and Planning, Sun Yat-sen University, Guanzhou, China. E-mail: gaoq59@mail.sysu.edu.cn. His research interests include geographies of migration, religion, and overseas Chinese communities.

PETER HOPKINS is a Professor in the School of Geography, Politics, and Sociology, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK. E-mail: peter.hopkins@ncl.ac.uk. His interests center on issues of social inequality and justice with most of his research focusing on the intersections of youth, migration and asylum, race and religion, and gender. He is currently a Leverhulme Major Research Fellow.

XINRONG MA is an Associate Professor in the School of Government, Sun Yat-sen University, Guanzhou, China. E-mail: maxr5@mail.sysu.edu.cn. Her research focuses on migration, ethnicity, labor, and citizenship.