

    

## AD HOC REGIONALISM IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT*

## MAX LU

abstract. Government units such as counties and cities have long been the basis for economic development, service delivery, and problem solving in rural America, but they are increasingly inappropriate, because many of them are too small to reach the critical mass and because rural issues often transcend arbitrarily set political boundaries. T o overcome the resultant adverse effects, many rural communities have been rethinking their development strategies and actively forging regional partnerships. Ad hoc regionalism is a politically feasible and effective way for rural communities to collaborate in these initiatives. The exact issues that spark such collaboration may vary from place to place, but they are all grassroots, voluntary regional governance frameworks or innovations. They allow rural communities to pool their resources and reach the critical mass necessary to tackle a variety of regional issues and take advantage of new economic development opportunities without replacing or threatening existing government units. The two case studies discussed in this article  the western Kansas Rural Economic Development Alliance and the San Juan Forum in the Four Corners region of the southwestern United States  show that ad hoc regionalism offers several advantages over rural communities working independently but that challenges in implementing it exist. Keywords: ad hoc regionalism, economic development, Four Corners region, rural America, U.S. Southwest, western Kansas.

R egionalism has a long and storied history in the economic development practices  of  the  United States. As early as in  the  National Resources Committee advocated regions as crucial elements in dealing with social and economic problems and recommended the creation of multistate organizations that would apply regional development plans that followed guidelines provided by the national government. The Tennessee Valley Authority ( tva ), launched in  , and the Appalachian Regional Commission ( arc ), created in  , are perhaps the two best-known examples of large-scale regional development programs from the early and midtwentieth century (Isserman and Rephann  ; Boyce  ). Both projects were a response to severe economic and social problems in their respective region, and in both cases 'the nation's fiscal resources and best minds were committed to the task of effecting qualitative change in the economic bases of relatively poor regions' (Pudup  ,  ). Although the tva later became mainly a public power company, the arc is an example of the successful use of a regional approach to promote rural development (Isserman and Rephann  ). Many other regional planning initiatives,  including eight regional commissions modeled after the arc ,  were  created during the  s (Isserman  ). In the  s, however, regional planning fell out of political favor. Economic development became the responsibility of local governments, especially cities and counties.

* I am grateful to all the people I interviewed for this project. A National Science Foundation grant for Infrastructure to Develop a Human-Environment Regional Observatory Network ( --- ) funded part of my fieldwork in western Kansas. Craig Colten and two anonymous reviewers deserve special thanks for their very helpful comments for improving the manuscript.

/ornament11 Dr. Lu is an associate professor of geography at Kansas State University, Manhattan, Kansas  ; [maxlu@k-state.edu].

Since the early  s regional thinking has drawn renewed interest from economic development practitioners, community leaders, and scholars. Instead of the earlier large-scale, top-down plans, the regional initiatives that are being promoted now are often grassroots, collaborative efforts, whereby neighboring communities voluntarily form a regional alliance based on the common issues or challenges they face, usually with some links to multicounty metropolitan organizations such as sewage districts and park districts. Some scholars have called this practice 'ad hoc regionalism' (Porter and Wallis  ; Hamin and Marcucci  ). Ad hoc regional organizations have existed in large urban areas in the United States for quite some time, but now they are emerging across rural America too. Although the exact number of such organizations is difficult to determine, examples are legion. 1

The purpose of this article is to analyze the impetus for ad hoc regionalism in rural areas and to examine its characteristics and advantages in rural economic development and problem solving. Regionalism may connote different things to different people. It is not the same as what has generally been characterized as 'new regionalism,' although the emergence of the former in rural America appears to have coincided with the debate on the latter (Lovering  ,  ;  T omaney and Ward  ; Webb and Collis  ; MacLeod  ). New regionalism, especially in the European context, is usually predicated on the view that the relentless process of globalization and the shift from Fordism to post-Fordism have resulted in a rescaling or reterritorialization of political economic activity. The role of the nation-state is considered weakened due to its declining capability for carrying out Keynesian macroeconomic management  redistributive policies and strategic placement of public investments, for example. Instead, a region is now the most obvious site for economic activities and also the territorial sphere most suited to the interaction of political, social, and economic processes (Storper  ; Keating  ,  ; T omaney and Ward  ; MacLeod  ; Scott and Storper  ; Brenner  ; Hudson  ). New regionalism tends to be about city regions, so much so that John Harrison insists that the proper term for the phenomenon should be 'new city regionalism' (  ). Ad hoc regionalism in rural areas, on the other hand, often stems more from practical considerations than from a new understanding of global political economic dynamics (McDaniel  ). It is a grassroots effort to help rural areas overcome the adverse effects of small populations and limited fiscal resources and reach the critical mass necessary for both tackling various problems that often transcend political boundaries and implementing new economic development strategies.

In this article I first make a case for thinking regionally and, more specifically, for adopting ad hoc regionalism by describing the changing socioeconomic realities  and challenges in rural America. I then discuss the characteristics of ad hoc regionalism through two case studies  the western Kansas Rural Economic Development Alliance ( wkreda ) and the San Juan Forum ( sjf ) in the Four Corners region of the southwestern United States. Both the wkreda and the sjf embody the ad hoc regional approach in their organizational structures and activities, but they have fared differently. The former has been playing an important role in economic

development in western Kansas since its inception in  , whereas the latter  located where Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah join each other at right angles  ceased to function in  following the departure of a key player. Their experiences provide valuable lessons about the challenges of implementing ad hoc regionalism.

## Changing Rural Realities and the Need to Think and Act Regionally

Rural communities are adopting ad hoc regionalism in response to both changing socioeconomic realities and the challenges they face in dealing with a host of regional issues and in implementing new economic development strategies. Ad hoc regionalism appears to be an effective and politically feasible way to overcome the limitations of current political configurations and bring rural communities together to work toward maintaining or even enhancing their competitive advantages in the global economy and their quality of life.

Rural areas in the United States have been undergoing rapid social, economic, and demographic changes and face a number of challenges to their future wellbeing (Browne and Swanson  ; Johnson  ; Ward and Brown  ). The remarkable success of U.S. agriculture in the second half of the twentieth century resulted in ever-expanding farms but ever-fewer farmworkers. Many parts of rural America have lost population since the early twentieth century (Albrecht  ; Rathge and Highman  ; Johnson and Rathge  ). Along with a shrinking population, rural places have lost their political influence, their functional organizations have faded away, and their social fabric has worn thin (Jacobs  ).  The eroding tax base makes it increasingly difficult to provide essential services such as education and health care (McDaniel  ). In areas that are experiencing population growth, residents face a different set of challenges. A larger population may expand the tax base and stimulate local economic activities, but it can also raise housing prices, increase traffic, and strain local infrastructure. The influx of new residents, particularly immigrants, often results in conflicts between long-term residents and newcomers (Kelsey  ).

Rural areas are generally characterized by wide-open space and small, dispersed populations. Low land costs, lack of traffic congestion, and lack of pollution are important assets that traditionally attracted manufacturing industries to rural areas, but low population density  the hallmark of being rural  is  a  liability  in modern economic development (Isserman  ; Thompson  ). It works against the development of agglomeration economies. Firms may find it difficult to reach the necessary customer threshold for their products and services, or a limited labor pool may inhibit business activities. In order to attract nonfarm businesses and create jobs, many local governments resort to incentive packages such as tax abatement and infrastructure upgrading, but they often find themselves competing with each other and therefore susceptible to exploitation by large corporations (Barlett and Steele  ).

The situation is compounded by globalization of the world economy (Thompson  ; Longworth  ). Rural areas now must compete with the rest of the world and are affected by shifts in the global market. Many rural communities in the United States, such as those supported by mining, by farming, by timber industry, or by lowwage and low-skill manufacturing, have been losing their historic job bases. Recruiting manufacturing industries to rural America is becoming increasingly costly. In addition, environmental change and variability, as well as changes in such natural resources as groundwater, on which agriculture and other extractive industries depend, are also adding uncertainty to rural economies and communities.

The conventional approach to rural economic development planning and problem solving relies on government units such as cities and counties. Government units are convenient to use, and data for them are readily available, but they are much less appropriate today than when they were established some  years ago. County boundaries were delineated before the automobile era and ensured that residents could reach their county seat and return home in one day's time traveling by horse-drawn buggies or on foot (Shelley and others  ).  Many counties are just too small to have the critical mass of facilities, resources, and people to solve problems and support economic development (Pezzini  ). Advances in transportation and communication technologies and population loss have made the county even less viable as a unit for economic planning, problem solving, and service delivery. Rural issues are rarely confined to arbitrarily set political boundaries. Tackling them usually requires adjacent counties and communities to work together and use resources that are not available to any one jurisdiction. Intergovernmental cooperation is therefore critical if problem-solving measures are to succeed.

In the conventional political configuration, few effective mechanisms exist for local governments to collaborate. That statistical data for government units are readily available but difficult to obtain for regions that may be appropriate for dealing with various issues in rural economic development further discourages regional thinking and intergovernmental cooperation (Vigier, Driscoll, and Lee-Chuvala  ). When issues such as infrastructure expansion, environmental and resource management, and tourism development transcend political boundaries they are often dealt with inadequately or left unaddressed.

The need to solve problems is only one reason for adopting regional thinking in rural America, however. While posing challenges, the ongoing socioeconomic and technological changes are also creating opportunities for rural areas to build new economic engines, improve service provision, and maintain and even increase economic viability and quality of life. For example, recent advances in transportation and communication technologies have greatly reduced the restrictive effects of distance. The physical locations of many knowledge-intensive operations, among them accounting, health care, and computer programming, are all but irrelevant. Scale and agglomeration relate not so much to production at a specific location as to the scope and efficiency of the linkages. For firms can now reach both internal and external economies of scale through global networking instead of by pursuing an

integrated, big-push strategy locally (Ward and Hite  ).  The  effect  of  the  socalled natural disadvantage that rural areas have in terms of distance and low population density has been weakening (Johnson  ;  Thompson  ).  Rural areas may be able to attract new nonfarm jobs, including the new economy jobs (Stabler  ; Isserman  ). At the same time, some businesses in densely populated urban areas are seeking to relocate because of such factors as increasing land prices, crime, traffic congestion, high labor turnover, and more stringent environmental regulations. This also creates new economic opportunities for rural areas. Furthermore, considerable potential exists for rural areas to develop tourism and attract retirees because demand for rural lifestyle is growing (Johnson  ;  Thompson  ). The new communication technologies have also provided new options for service provision, especially in the area of health care.

Claiming new opportunities, however, also requires rural areas to collaborate in order to reach the critical mass of people, businesses, and services needed. As Mark Drabenstott and Katharine Sheaff rightly pointed out, 'such opportunities will develop only with new models of partnering  across firms and across governments' (  ,  ). Current economic development initiatives at the community level tend to be piecemeal. Local community leaders usually focus on their own community and have relatively limited knowledge about activities in neighboring communities. Such measures may solve short-term problems, but they are unlikely to lead to long-term prosperity.

## Ad Hoc Regionalism

Given the limitations of the current configurations of local governments, a logical reaction is to call for government consolidation and merging. Indeed, scholars and politicians have frequently made such calls, often based on the potential benefits of improving efficiency and reducing the cost of service provision (Self  ; Burger and Combs  ;  Steineger  a,  b). Existing political boundaries, particularly county boundaries, however, seem well entrenched in people's mind. Ballot initiatives for government consolidation and merging have consistently failed to pass (Porter and Wallis  ). For example, scholars and politicians in Kansas have made several proposals to pare the state's  counties down to  ,  ,  or  even  counties (Self  ;  Kurtz  ;  Steineger  a,  b). Few people would deny that Kansas has too many counties, but little support for consolidation exists. So far only two cases of city-county consolidation have occurred, one between Kansas City (Kansas) and Wyandotte County and the other between the city of Tribune and Greeley County in western Kansas. There is no prospect of county consolidation in the near future. Rural areas need alternative, politically feasible models of regional governance that overcome the weaknesses of the current governing structure and encourage interjurisdictional collaboration and partnering among communities, the private sector, and government.

An effective and feasible form of regional governance is ad hoc regionalism. It constitutes voluntary, often grassroots initiatives by interested stakeholders who

seek collaborative, incentive-based measures rather than regulatory solutions to regional challenges. The main feature of ad hoc regionalism is its use of flexibly defined ad hoc regions. Regions are segments of the earth's surface differentiated by various human and physical characteristics; they are intellectual constructs and, as such, do not exist until people recognize them (Wishart  ). What sets ad hoc regions apart from other types of regions is that local residents create them based on common issues or conditions that need addressing. The boundaries of such regions depend loosely on the perceived areal extent of the issues or challenges, so they often transcend established political boundaries. The key concern is to use the concept to foster regional partnerships and to achieve the critical mass needed to respond to and solve practical regional problems as well as to take advantage of new opportunities (Porter and Wallis  ). The scale of ad hoc regions may vary substantially, from a portion of a county, to several counties in a state, or even to several states.

Ad hoc regional organizations have existed in urban areas of the United States for decades. Urban planners have long felt the limitations of existing jurisdictional structures in dealing with urban problems such as sprawl, traffic congestion, environmental degradation, and regional disparity, as well as in responding to economic opportunities. Many metropolitan areas have developed an amorphous collection of governance experiments involving interest groups from multiple sectors in looseknit, collaborative relationships, including councils of governments, regional planning councils, and metropolitan planning organizations (Porter and Wallis  ; Vigier, Driscoll, and Lee-Chuvala  ). Decision makers in the public and private sectors as well as in academia recognize their important role in dealing with regional issues (Porter and Wallis  ). The need for more flexible regional governance has arisen equally if not more urgently in rural areas where political fragmentation, a proclivity for independence, and small populations often lead to political impasse.

Since roughly the early  s,  development practitioners, advocates, and academics have realized the value of ad hoc regional governance in rural areas, and many regional organizations have emerged across rural America (Porter and Wallis  ; McDaniel  ; Fluharty  ; Hamin and Marcucci  ). As an indicator of this growing interest, the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy  a nonprofit organization based in Cambridge, Massachusetts  convened a forum in April  to  explore issues related to ad hoc regionalism in both urban and rural areas (Porter and Wallis  ). In  the Center for the Study of Rural America at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City held a conference on 'The New Power of Regions' in dealing with rural problems. A dozen policy experts and  or so participants concluded that rural policy needs to promote more regional partnering among rural entrepreneurs, communities, and governments (Drabenstott and Sheaff  ). They singled out self-defined regions, where unique economic activities were occurring  for example, biopharming in Iowa and broadband development in the Four Corners region of the southwestern United States  as good examples of regionally

focused activities (Drabenstott and Sheaff  ; Isserman  ; Mortensen  ). The concept of self-defined regions is essentially the same as ad hoc regions discussed in this article. Increasing use of partnerships among public, private, and voluntary sectors is also one feature of the 'new rural paradigm' (Ward and Brown  ).

In  , writing about the driving forces behind ad hoc rural regionalism, Hamin and Marcucci divide rural America into three types based on Terry Marsden's  work on rural territories. The first type is 'paternalistic countryside,' which refers to profitable agricultural areas such as Iowa, 'where large holders and agribusiness prevail in relatively stable landscapes' (Hamin and Marcucci  ,  ). Remote, isolated rural areas with less viable global-scale agriculture and an often poor, elderly, or Native American population form the second type. Marsden asserted that in those areas government subsidies are critical to the survival of farming and much of the rest of the rural economy and that employment concerns and the welfare of the rural community will dominate local politics (  ).  Instead of calling them 'clientelistic countryside'  Marsden's term  Hamin and Marcucci prefer 'marginal countryside,' with North Dakota being their example. Their third category is 'contested countryside,' characterized by relative proximity to metropolitan centers or universities, natural amenity-based recreation, and rapid population growth. Contestation in those areas often arises between competing uses of natural resources and between long-term residents and newcomers.

Hamin and Marcucci assert that ad hoc regionalist efforts are most likely to occur in the contested countryside. This point is debatable. Although intracommunity social conflicts and challenges posed by a rapidly growing population in contested rural areas provide strong motivation for ad hoc regionalism, they are by no means the only driving force. There are equally compelling reasons for regional thinking in the so-called marginal countryside such as the Great Plains and the Four Corners region. Indeed, a number of ad hoc regional organizations have emerged in those areas over the past few decades. My two case studies are good examples, but others exist (McDaniel  ). Instead of dealing with the pressures caused by rapid population growth and contested resource uses, ad hoc regional organizations in 'marginal' areas try to cope with the threats of both population and economic decline or the very process of 'marginalization.' Their organizers see the advantages of regional collaboration and partnering in solving regional problems, developing new economic engines, and maintaining a sense of community. The driving forces for ad hoc regional initiatives may differ from case to case, but two common features are that they are all grassroots efforts and that they are usually problem based; that is to say, ad hoc.

## Ad Hoc Regionalism in Action: Two Case Studies

Two recent examples of ad hoc regionalism in rural America are the wkreda and the sjf . Both cases are from the so-called marginal countryside, where the need for such regional partnerships is particularly great. Whereas the wkreda involves mul-

tiple counties in a single state  Kansas  the sjf encompassed parts of four states. The two organizations followed different trajectories after their inception, however. By all accounts, the wkreda is having a very positive impact on economic and community development in its region. The sjf ,  on  the  other  hand,  ceased functioning after a very promising start due to the departure of a key player. Their experiences may offer useful lessons to other rural communities that have implemented or are thinking about implementing similar types of regional corporate governance.

For my case studies I used a number of methods, including field visits, online research, and interviews with key informants to learn about these organizations' purposes, triumphs, and failures. The fieldwork on the wkreda and western Kansas took place in four trips during the first half of the  s in conjunction with another research project. I first heard about the sjf at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's meeting on the power of regions in  and followed it afterwards. To see the region firsthand, I toured the Four Corners region by automobile in March  .

Two important sources of information on both the wkreda and the sjf are their Web sites. 2 The wkreda site contains the organization's bylaws, strategic plans, and fairly complete minutes of the group's annual and committee meetings, so it is particularly informative. The sjf page, linked from the Fort Lewis College Web site, is much briefer, but the report of a Four Corners regional study commissioned by the organization and available on the Web site provides useful background information on the region and its constituent communities (Graves  ). Other media reports and formal publications on these two organizations appear to be limited. The only two published documents I found are both about the sjf (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ; cad  ). I read all these documents very carefully and many of them multiple times.

To better understand the impetuses for and practices of the two regional organizations, I interviewed ten people for the wkreda case  all except one from western Kansas  and five for the sjf example between October  and July  . Eleven of  the  interviews  were  by  telephone,  three  by  e-mail,  and  one  in  person.  The interviewees include two former presidents of the wkreda , the executive director of the sjf , county economic development practitioners, private-sector employees, and a scholar familiar with the wkreda .  I  selected some interviewees because of their involvement in the regional organizations and others to represent different parts of the regions concerned. A number of additional people turned down requests for interviews, usually for lack of knowledge, but they often recommended others, some of whom I interviewed. All interviewees answered five open-ended questions: What issues prompted the regional thinking? What can the wkreda / sjf do that individual counties/communities cannot? What are the wkreda 's/ sjf 's major accomplishments so far? How do you deal with the competition among local governments? What lessons have you learned from this regional experience? The discussion below draws information from all of the sources I have described.

## the western kansas rural economic development alliance

Like other parts of the Great Plains, western Kansas is a sparsely populated, somewhat isolated agricultural region. It faces a number of challenges to its economic well-being. First, most of the incorporated places in this region are small farm communities, with Garden City (population  ,  in  ),  Dodge City (population  ,  ), Hays (  ,  ), and Liberal (  ,  ) the only four cities with more than  ,  people ( ipsr  ). Community leaders and residents have long believed that their small population size and relatively long distance from the state capital  Topeka, located in the more densely populated eastern part of the state  put them at a disadvantage in economic development. They feel that state lawmakers do not always pay adequate attention to their concerns. Second, this region has experienced varying trajectories of demographic change in recent decades due to the uneven development of both irrigated agriculture and value-added industries (White  ,  ; Williams and Bloomquist  ). That irrigation plays an important role in sustaining rural population in western Kansas itself raises concern about the long-term economic sustainability of many communities there. The saturated thickness of the Ogallala Aquifer that underlies the region and the related usable lifetime of groundwater vary considerably from place to place ( kgs  ). In some areas conversion to dryland farming has already been under way. The 'planned depletion' of the aquifer has profound implications for western Kansas and, indeed, other parts of the High Plains region. The future of many communities may well hinge on their ability to adjust to groundwater depletion and to diversify local economies.

In May  more than eighty-five community leaders and economic development practitioners in western Kansas met to discuss their economic problems and what they needed to do to solve them. They realized that they faced some common issues and that solving them would require them to pool their resources and work together. The idea of forming a regional alliance was born at that meeting, and the wkreda came into being shortly thereafter. The alliance's objectives are to promote the exchange of ideas and information among its members, to provide resources to assist  in  local  and  regional  development, and, ultimately, to revitalize the region through cooperative, community, and rural development activities ( wkreda  ). The organization formed four committees  business development, government affairs, education, and public relations  that work independently but report their activities to the group at its quarterly business meetings.

The wkreda embodies the ad hoc regional approach in its activities and organizational structure. It is a grassroots, nonprofit organization initiated by the local people who share similar concerns about the region's future and wanted to find solutions in a cooperative way. Participation is voluntary, and membership is open to economic development entities, government and nongovernmental agencies, and interested individuals. Flexibility in regional definition is another important feature of ad hoc regionalism. The wkreda adjusted its boundaries over time. Initially, it  comprised forty-six counties, but by the end of  it  had  expanded to fiftythree member counties, encompassing just over half of the state's counties (Figure

F .  Fifty-three counties in western Kansas are now members of the western Kansas Rural Economic Development Alliance. (Cartography by the author and Keela Andrews)

<!-- image -->

-  ).  The common concerns about their small populations  hence lack of political clout in the state legislature  and economic decline brought them together and have given meaning to the region.

Promoting intercommunity collaboration and partnership in rural areas requires trust and understanding among the communities. Rural residents generally take pride in their independence, but now they need to learn to work together. In a place with wide-open space, sparsely distributed inhabitants, and long-running high school rivalries, that has not been an easy task. The wkreda organizers built trust and understanding among alliance's constituents by taking appropriate measures on its organizational structure and business operations. Recognizing the differences between the northern and southern parts of western Kansas, the founders made sure to elect an equal number of representatives from the two subregions to the Board of Directors. That proved very helpful in lessening the intrinsic distrust among neighboring communities.

To encourage information sharing and networking among participating communities, the wkreda maintains a Web site and a member listserv, publishes a newsletter, and holds quarterly business meetings as well as an annual meeting. It also

emphasizes networking with state government agencies and other trade organizations that serve similar purposes, such as the Kansas Cavalry (the state's business recruiting organization), the Western Kansas Manufacturing Association (a group of small manufacturers in the same region), and the western Kansas Dairy Coalition (a preexisting dairy trade group). In addition, the wkreda communicates regularly with the state lawmakers about issues concerning western Kansas. However, to maintain its independence the alliance decided from its inception that it would not accept government funding  one of the reasons, my interviewees claimed, for its success. Membership dues and the pay-to-play fees fund the organization. All of the board members are employees of local governments and utility companies in the region and receive no compensation for their services.

To promote business opportunities in western Kansas, wkreda delegates have attended many national and international trade shows, such as the World Dairy Expo in Madison, Wisconsin, and Trends  , a trade show in California specifically organized for those businesses seeking to relocate outside the state. The alliance requires that anyone on a recruitment mission represent the entire wkreda region instead of individual communities. Business leads are passed on to all member communities, which are then free to follow up and market their specific communities. Promoting western Kansas as a region may be another factor that has helped to sustain the regional effort. The approach ensures a relatively equal distribution of benefits  or at least opportunities  and is also sensitive to the viability of individual communities (Stabler  ,  ). Competition among communities  still  exists,  but  rivalry  seems  to  be  quickly  set  aside  when  the  region's well-being is at stake. As one interviewee commented, the 'What's in it for me?' mind-set is being replaced by the 'What's good for us?' mentality. As an example of  this  change,  when a company contacted Ellis County about building greenhouses there, the county economic development director actually suggested that the company go to a town  miles north, in another county, because it had unused greenhouses  which the company did. Another example of this supportive mentality is that when a business is selling out in one place, community leaders are informing their counterparts elsewhere about the availability of equipment that may be too expensive to buy new.

As an ad hoc regional organization the wkreda provides a number of advantages over individual counties or cities. Every interviewee pointed out its value as a networking conduit for rural communities to share information about new development initiatives and to seek suggestions for dealing with various problems from other communities. The wkreda 's financial resources allow it to send members to conferences, trade shows, and workshops, which individual communities, with their usually small budgets, may not be able to. Finally, working together as a region not only gives western Kansas one voice and much more political clout on regional issues in the state legislature but also opens other doors to small rural communities. For example, they now have access to more funding sources for economic development projects than they would if they were working independently.

A major area in which the wkreda has worked since its inception is the recruitment of large dairy farms as the region's new engine of growth. The decision to focus on dairying was made based on western Kansas's long tradition of animal economy and favorable geographical conditions for dairying  open space, a semiarid climate, groundwater resources, and so forth  as well as on the challenges that dairies were facing in more densely populated parts of the United States. To that end the wkreda convinced the western Kansas Dairy Coalition to join it and work as a single unit. It has attended dairy trade shows and organized its own annual dairy conferences  later called the 'Dairy University'  which have provided investors and dairy farmers elsewhere opportunities to see western Kansas while learning about changes and opportunities in the industry. By early  ,  twenty-one dairy farms had moved to western Kansas with the assistance of the wkreda ,  so that the total number of large dairy farms in the region increased to twenty-five (see Figure  ). The region's dairy-herd size had almost doubled since the early  s to approximately  ,  head of dairy cows, making western Kansas an emerging dairying area (Harrington, Lu, and Kromm  ). Here again the 'What's good for us' mind-set comes into play. Not every county can accommodate large dairies because of the land and water resources needed, but people still support this initiative because they believe they can benefit, for example, by providing supplies and veterinary services. In fact, western Kansas is hoping to build an entire industry from dairy cows, veterinarians, supply businesses, milk and cheese processing, and eventually pharmaceutical and nutriceutical uses for parts of milk (protein, fat, sugars, and so forth). In the meantime, the wkreda is looking beyond dairy. In  it launched a 'Western Kansas Jobs' campaign that aims in part 'to recruit individuals from outside the area looking for new career or seeking a change in lifestyle, or just looking to relocate' (Depperschmidt  ). 3

The wkreda 's  work may have a profound impact on the future well-being of western Kansas. One of the characteristics about globalization is that it has a highly uneven regional effect, for some regions are likely to be privileged and others bypassed. By forming a regional alliance and nurturing a regional identity, communities in western Kansas are essentially 'renegotiating' a place in the globalizing economy and preventing global economic forces from playing them off against one another.

## the san juan forum

One major impetus for ad hoc regionalism is the set of disadvantages associated with political fragmentation, such as lack of a critical mass of population and businesses and difficulty in interjurisdictional collaboration. The disadvantages often undermine rural economic development and problem solving. Issues that occur along jurisdictional boundaries present a particular challenge because the affected population may be too small in either jurisdiction to attain the political influence needed. Perhaps no site typifies this situation more than the Four Corners region. Its experience offers valuable lessons about the challenges of running regional organizations.

The four state corners have much in common geographically and economically. Linked by the San Juan River, which meanders through the area, all four corners are arid, sparsely populated, geographically isolated due to their long distances from the interstate highway system and from their respective state capitals as well as other major cities. In many ways they are more similar to each other than to the rest of

F .  The San Juan Forum covers Native American tribes and counties in the Four Corners region of the southwestern United States. (Cartography by the author and Keela Andrews)

<!-- image -->

their respective states. However, political boundaries  literally lines in the sand  and regional rivalries have long hampered communities' efforts to work together to tackle their common challenges in enhancing economic viability and quality of life. The large number of governments that exist in this area compound the situation. In addition to the four state governments, there are counties, which usually have different sets of regulations, and within counties are town or city councils. The Native American tribal nations in the area, including the Southern Ute, the Jicarilla Apache,

the Ute Mountain Ute, and the Navajo, are considered sovereign nations within the United States, all with their own governments, judicial systems, and law enforcement under the authority of the federal government. In addition, federal agencies such as the Bureau of Land Management, the Forest Service, and the National Park Service play important roles in local affairs because the federal government owns about  .  percent of the area's land. Because these corner areas all lack political clout, some people have referred to them as the 'stepchildren' of their respective states (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ).

Many people have long realized the need for intergovernmental cooperation in the Four Corners region, and the push has come both from the federal government and the grassroots levels. As an example of the former, the federal government established the Four Corners Regional Planning Commission in  to promote economic revitalization through interstate cooperation. The commission was short-lived because President Richard M. Nixon abolished it in  .  Moreover, several grassroots regional initiatives have been created. The sjf ,  formed in January  ,  represents the most recent attempt. The purpose of this nonprofit corporation was to promote 'regional information exchange, regional unity and identity, and collective efficiency in the use and development of regional resources' (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ,  ). The forum focused on breaking down institutional boundaries and barriers to promote partnerships among local governments, federal agencies, and the private sector in an area covering approximately  ,  square miles. Its organizational structure encouraged 'adhocracy' or 'a flexible, open system and public-private balance' (p.  ).  A Board of Directors governs the forum. David Eppich, then an assistant to the president of Fort Lewis College, played a pivotal role in the sjf . He not only believed firmly that, for sparsely populated places like the Four Corners, regionalism is the way to go but also possessed the vision and leadership to bring the communities together to make it happen. He served as the executive director of the sjf from its inception.

Like the wkreda , the sjf emphasized the need to facilitate regional networking and collaboration and to pool the resources of communities and existing organizations to address regional issues, particularly those that could not be dealt with adequately by individual communities or organizations. The founders considered communication between different entities 'vital for a successful future for all citizens in the region' (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ,  ; cad  ).

The forum focused on bringing various stakeholders together into a common course of action, to nurture the Four Corners as a regional entity, and to achieve economies of scale (Figure  ). As in other parts of the United States, local governments in the Four Corners region compiled economic and demographic data separately. The multitude of entities involved and formats used for data collection made interjurisdictional comparison and regional decision making virtually impossible. The sjf helped to develop a regional database and community snapshot to facilitate cooperative decision making (Graves  ). The region's two institutions of higher learning  Fort Lewis College, a four-year liberal arts college in Durango, Colorado;

and San Juan College, a two-year community college in Farmington, New Mexico  provided nonpartisan support in education, research, and leadership development that was important to the regional cooperative endeavors (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ). Fort Lewis College also housed the sjf .

The forum emphasized regional economic development strategies that would crosscut state, tribal, and county lines and unify the efforts of local governments and other groups. After an extended period of deliberation, the forum identified the regional issues to engage in, among them telecommunications, transportation, valueadded and sustainable agriculture, tourism, and health care. The forum, however, served essentially as a regionalism advocate. It did not try to raise funds or secure grants. Existing individuals or agencies carried out specific action strategies (Anesi, Eppich, and Taylor  ). For example, one of the forum's major accomplishments involved the World Wide Web: It generated interest and rallied the players to create a broadband Internet network for the Four Corners in order to improve the region's telecommunication infrastructure and generate new opportunities for economic development. Another nonprofit regional organization  the San Juan Economic Development Service's Regional Telecommunications Committee  a ctually coordinated the effort, sought private investment, and found contractors to construct the line. The network that links Albuquerque in New Mexico and Grand Junction in Colorado was completed in November  .

The sjf organizers clearly understood the challenges the Four Corners region faced in economic development and had many good ideas. Unfortunately, one area in which they failed to do enough, according to Eppich, was to obtain the broadest possible public support for the regional efforts; in other words, the sjf did not develop a broad-based constituency. Some of my interviewees admitted that the sjf was perceived more or less as Eppich's brainchild. Despite its achievements in the first one and one-half decades of its existence, it stopped functioning shortly after Eppich moved to an administrative position at San Juan College in Farmington, New Mexico, in the spring of  .

## Going Regional: Lessons Learned

Economic and demographic changes in rural America both pose challenges and create new opportunities for economic development. In this article I have argued that, in order to tackle various issues effectively and to take advantage of the new opportunities, rural communities need to overcome the limitations of the current political configurations and work together. Ad hoc regionalism provides a politically feasible and effective way for rural communities to collaborate and form partnerships (Porter and Wallis  ; McDaniel  ; Fluharty  ; Hamin and Marcucci  ). The regional organizations that emerge from this process can also serve as conduits for information sharing and networking, in the process reducing transaction costs for the whole region. Because of the greater political and economic clout it affords a region, ad hoc regionalism may be a way for rural areas, particularly isolated, sparsely populated, and agriculture-dependent areas such as the Great

Plains and the Four Corners region, to mitigate the pernicious effects of economic globalization and, in a way, to 'renegotiate' a place in the globalizing economy and prevent the global economic forces from playing rural areas off against one another (Longworth  ).

Despite its benefits, ad hoc regionalism does not occur easily. Beverly Cigler identified nine preconditions for the emergence of multi community collaborative organizations in small, rural communities, including fiscal stress or perceived stress caused by some disaster occurrence, a political constituency, supportive capacity building, and visible advantages of cooperation for participating governments (  ). Jack Stabler also argued that, to sustain the regional effort, an organization must establish an appropriate governing structure, ensure a relatively equal distribution of benefits, and be sensitive to individual communities' viability (  ). Their points are borne out in the two case studies I presented in this article.

In both western Kansas and the Four Corners region residents perceive rural depopulation and economic decline as a disaster in progress, so the impetus for ad hoc regionalist practices is strong. Differences in the implementation of regionalism, however, led to different outcomes. Between the two, the wkreda seems to have had a more enduring organizational structure, with a representative Board of Directors and its president serving a one-year term. All of the wkreda 's board members are volunteers who hold other jobs and do not receive compensation for what they do for the group. Promoting the regional alliance is, as one interviewee put it, 'just a labor of love.' The sjf also had a board, but unlike the wkreda , it also had an executive director and a full-time, paid employee to run the organization. Securing funds for the position became a challenge.

A major challenge for regionalism is that 'region' is 'a scale of economic organization and change that lacks a compelling political category' (Hicks  ,  ). It takes a concerted effort by the communities involved to set their rivalries aside and collaborate for their common good. The vision and strong leadership of a few key personnel is often crucial in this process, particularly in its early stages, but organizational governance must move beyond these key players. Regionalism cannot survive and, indeed, may be resisted if the citizens do not buy into the idea and see its benefits (Hall and Stern  ). From the outset, the wkreda organizers made substantial efforts to eliminate distrust among communities and to bring people together. They decided that the traditionally divided northern and southern parts of the region should be represented equally on the organization's Board of Directors. Their decision helped to dispel the misgivings that some communities, particularly small ones, had about their roles in the alliance and to build mutual trust among communities. The group's decision to market western Kansas as a region instead of individual communities in its business-recruitment activities further lessened distrust. The sjf ,  on the other hand, failed to change the perception that it was one person's brainchild and to garner support from its constituents, who were scattered in four states.

Furthermore, to justify their investments in time and money, members of a regional organization must see benefits. Here too the wkreda may have been more

successful than the sjf . The wkreda actively provides informational and financial assistance to its constituents in their economic development endeavors. It also pools resources in business recruitment, with impressive successes in attracting large dairies to move to western Kansas. Residents of the region appear to appreciate the fact that, with a relatively small investment, their communities can benefit from a social and educational/training structure, and they have supported it. The sjf faced a much more complex political situation and did not do enough to nurture a supportive constituency. It acted mainly as an advocate of regional thinking, with no attempts to recruit businesses to the region. The sjf had some successes, especially in its effort to bring together the right players for the creation of a broadband Internet network, but its benefits were more intangible.

Challenges notwithstanding, the experiences of the wkreda and other successful examples of rural ad hoc regionalism show that the regional form of governance can work effectively in dealing with various rural issues and taking advantage of new economic opportunities despite the problem Hicks pointed out in  :  the absence of both legal borders and a political constituency. Implemented appropriately, such grassroots, informal, flexible organizations can complement the existing political structure and play an important role in rural economic development.

## Notes

-  . Kendall McDaniel (  ), Charles Fluharty (  ), and Elisabeth Hamin and Daniel Marcucci (  ) discuss a number of ad hoc regional organizations.
-  . The Web site for the wkreda is [www.DiscoverWesternKansas.com]; for the sjf , [www.fortlewis .edu/community\_culture/san\_juan\_forum/default.aspx].
-  . More information about the Western Kansas Jobs campaign is available at its Web site, [www .westernksjobs.com].

## References

- Albrecht, D. E.  . The Renewal of Population Loss in the Nonmetropolitan Great Plains. Rural Sociology  (  ):  - .
- Anesi, G., D. Eppich, and T. Taylor.  . Lines in the Sand: A Four Corners Regional Perspective (Including Questions and Answers). In The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America,  - . Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Barlett, D. L., and J. B. Steele.  . The Empire of the Pigs (Special Report: Corporate Welfare). Time,  November,  - .
- Boyce, R. R.  . Geographers and the Tennessee Valley Authority. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .
- Brenner, N.  . New State Spaces: Urban Governance and the Rescaling of Statehood . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Browne, W. P ., and L. E. Swanson.  . Living with the Minimum: Rural Public Policy. In The Changing American Countryside: Rural People and Places, edited by E. M. Castle,  - . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas.
- Burger, P ., and H. J. Combs.  . County Consolidation: Is Less More? Omaha, Neb.: Platte Institute for Economic Research. [www.platteinstitute.org/docLib/  \_County\_Consolidation\_FINAL.pdf].
- CAD [Community Affairs Department].  . Regionalism in the Four Corners Area Culture. Community Reinvestment  (  ):  - .
- Cigler, B. A.  . Pre-Conditions for the Emergence of Multicommunity Collaborative Organizations. Policy Studies Review  (  ):  - .

- Depperschmidt, E.  . E-mail message to the author.  July.
- Drabenstott, M., and K. H. Sheaff.  . The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America  A Conference Summary. In The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America,  - .  Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Fluharty, C. W.  . Assessing the State of Rural Governance in the United States. In New Governance for a New Rural Economy: Reinventing Public and Private Institutions,  - .  Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Graves, D.  . Four Corners Regional Study: Economies and Issues. Fort Lewis College, Durango, Colo. [www.fortlewis.edu/community\_culture/san\_juan\_forum/sjf\_  corners\_reg\_study.aspx].
- Hall, P . V ., and P . Stern.  . Reluctant Rural Regionalists. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- Hamin, E. M., and D. J. Marcucci.  . Ad Hoc Rural Regionalism. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .
- Harrington, L. M. B., M. Lu, and D. E. Kromm.  . Milking the Plains: Movement of Large Dairy Operations into Southwestern Kansas. Geographical Review  (  ):  - .
- Harrison, J.  . From Competitive Regions to Competitive City-Regions: A New Orthodoxy, but Some Old Mistakes. Journal of Economic Geography  (  ):  - .
- Hicks, D. A.  . The Rise and Fall of Regional Policy in the United States. Canadian Journal of Regional Science  (  ):  - .
- Hudson, R.  . Regions and Regional Uneven Development Forever? Some Reflective Comments upon Theory and Practice. Regional Studies  (  ):  - .
- IPSR [Institute for Policy and Social Research].  . Kansas Data: City Level Data. [www.ipsr.ku.edu /ksdata/city.shtml].
- Isserman, A. M.  . Competitive Advantages of Rural America in the Next Century. International Regional Science Review  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Defining Regions for Rural America. In The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America,  - . Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Isserman, A., and T. Rephann.  . The Economic Effects of the Appalachian Regional Commission: An Empirical Assessment of  Years of Regional Development Planning. Journal of the American Planning Association  (  ):  - .
- Jacobs, J. C.  . Ad Hoc Regions: Applying Regional Concepts to Solving Local Problems. Ph.D. diss., Kansas State University.
- Johnson, K. M., and R. W. Rathge.  . Agricultural Dependence and Changing Population in the Great Plains. In Population Change and Rural Society, edited by W. A. Kandel and D. L. Brown,  - .  Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.
- Johnson, T. G.  . The Rural Economy in a New Century. International Regional Science Review  (  ):  - .
- Keating, M.  . The Political Economy of Regionalism. In The Political Economy of Regionalism, edited by M. Keating and J. Louglin,  - . London: Frank Cass.
- ---.  . The Invention of Regions: Political Restructuring and Territorial Government in Western Europe. Environment and Planning C: Government and Policy  (  ):  - .
- Kelsey, T. W.  . Interdependence, Rules, and Rural Development. Growth and Change  (  ):  - .
- KGS [Kansas Geological Survey].  . An Atlas of the Kansas High Plains Aquifer . Lawrence, Kans.: Kansas Geological Survey. [www.kgs.ku.edu/HighPlains/atlas/].
- Kurtz, C.  . Consolidation: Is It Ready to Fly? Formerly at [www.sunpublications.com/  /news/consolidation-is-it-ready-to-fly.html].
- Longworth, R. C.  . Caught in the Middle: America's Heartland in the Age of Globalism . New York: Bloomsbury.
- Lovering, J.  . Theory Led by Policy: the Inadequacies of the 'New Regionalism' (Illustrated from the Case of Wales). International Journal of Urban and Regional Research  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . The Coming Regional Crisis (And How to Avoid It). Regional Studies  (  ):  - . MacLeod, G.  . New Regionalism Reconsidered: Globalization and the Remaking of Political Economic Space. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research  (  ):  - .
- Marsden, T.  . New Rural Territories: Regulating the Differentiated Rural Spaces. Journal of Rural Studies  (  ):  - .

- McDaniel, K.  . Thinking Regionally, Acting Locally: Emerging Rural Regions in the U.S. Main Street Economist. Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. [www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/mse/MSE\_  .pdf].
- Mortensen, R. R.  . A Bottom-Up Approach to Development. In The New Power of Regions: A Policy Focus for Rural America,  - . Kansas City, Mo.: Center for the Study of Rural America, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
- Pezzini, M.  . Rural Policy Lessons from OECD Countries. International Regional Science Review  (  ):  - .
- Porter, D. R., and A. D. Wallis.  . Exploring Ad Hoc Regionalism . Cambridge, Mass.: Lincoln Institute of Land Policy. [www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/PubDetail.aspx?pubid=  ].
- Pudup, M. B.  . Regional Development: More Than Ever, the Business of America. Urban Geography  (  ):  - .
- Rathge, R., and P. Highman.  . Population Change in the Great Plains: A History of Prolonged Decline. Rural Development Perspectives  (  ):  - .
- Scott, A. J., and M. Storper.  . Regions, Globalization, Development. Regional Studies  (  - ):  - .
- Self, H.  . Environment and Man in Kansas: A Geographical Analysis . Lawrence: Regents Press of Kansas.
- Shelley, F. M., J. C. Archer, F. M. Davidson, and S. D. Brunn.  . Political Geography of the United States . New York: Guilford Press.
- Stabler, J. C.  . Economics and Multicommunity Partnerships. Canadian Journal of Regional Science  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Rural America: A Challenge to Regional Scientists. Annals of Regional Science  (  ):  - . Steineger,  C.  a. Reinventing Government. [www.chrissteineger.com/  /  /reinventing -government/].
- ---.  b. Senate Bill No.  . Kansas Legislature, Session of  . Formerly at [www.kslegislature .org/bills/  /  .pdf/].
- Storper, M.  . The Resurgence of Regional Economies, Ten Years Later: The Region as a Nexus of Untraded Interdependencies. European Urban and Regional Studies  (  ):  - .
- Thompson, R. L.  . Globalization and Rural America. Chicago Fed Letter No.  . Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. [www.chicagofed.org/digital\_assets/publications/chicago\_fed\_letter /  /cfljune  \_  .pdf].
- Tomaney, J., and N. Ward.  . England and the 'New Regionalism.' Regional Studies  (  ):  - .
- Vigier, F., J.  Driscoll,  and C. Lee-Chuvala.  . Ad Hoc Regionalism: Managing Growth through Spatial Planning: Learning from the American Experience. Journal of Cross Border Studies in Ireland  :  - .
- Ward, N., and D. L. Brown.  . Placing the Rural in Regional Development. Regional Studies  (  ):  - .
- Ward, W. A., and J. C. Hite.  . Theory in Rural Development: An Introduction and Overview. Growth and Change  (  ):  - .
- Webb, D., and C. Collis.  . Regional Development Agencies and the 'New Regionalism' in England. Regional Studies  (  ):  - .
- White, S. E.  . Ogallala Oases: Water Use, Population Redistribution, and Policy Implications in the High Plains of Western Kansas,  - . Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Migration Trends in the Kansas Ogallala Region and the Internal Colonial Dependency Model. Rural Sociology  (  ):  - .
- Williams, D. D., and L. E. Bloomquist.  . From Dust Bowl to Green Circles: A Case Study of Haskell County, Kansas. Kansas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin  .  Manhattan: Kansas State University.
- Wishart, D. J.  . The Great Plains Region. In Encyclopedia of the Great Plains, edited by D. J. Wishart, xiii-xviii. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- wKREDA [Western Kansas Rural Economic Development Alliance].  . Corporate Bylaws. [www .wkreda.com/Document.aspx?id=  ].