Professional  Geographer 39(3) 1987  pp  275-287 cc Copyright 1987 by Association  af American Geographers

## RURAL POPULATION LOSS AND  CROPLAND CHANGE IN THE SOUTHERN PLAINS: IMPLICATIONS FOR CROPLAND  RETIREMENT POLICY*

## Rebecca S. Roberts

## University  of Iowa

Given  steadily increasing federal expenditures to manage surplus crop production.  if  wouid seem to make economic and  environmental  sense  to  concentrate production  on  the best  acreage and  to  retire  marginal crop  acreage  to alternate uses. A major obstacle constraining adoption and implementation of cropland retirement programs in the past has been the  fear that cropland retirement threatens the  viability of  rural communities.  Regression of  change in population  and retail establishmenfs on changes in farm structure, nonfarm employment, and agricultural landuse in the rural Southern Plains between  1930 and  1970 provides only weak evidence to support this fear. In fact, short-term  cropland  idling  under post-1960  price-support  programs  appears  to pose  more  of  a  threat  to  rural communities  than does  cropland  retirement. Key Words: rural  population,  retail establishments, larm policy, cropland retirement, Conservation Reserve.

A short ten years ago, export demand for U.S. agricultural commodities was expanding, and farmers were exhorted to plant fence-row to fence-row to meet world food demands. Today the  critical  farm  policy  problem  has  reverted  from  one of scarcity  to abundance  1251.  We produce more than we can sell, and surplus commodities accumulate in government storage under federal programs designed to protect commodity prices and farm incomes. Part of the problem can be attributed to an overvalued dollar and changes in international agricultural commodity markets. A good portion,  however,  must also  be attributed  to a technological dynamic that continues to yield increases in per-acre productivity [fl. After a decade in which yield increases appeared to be stalled,  experts are beginning to say that the opportunities  for steadily  improving yields are greater  now than they have ever been [251.

Given this  forecast  and  steadily  increasing federal  expenditures  to idle some  of  our  best crop acreage under farm  income support  programs, common sense would suggest that we concentrate production on the best acreage and use federal dollars to retire marginal acreage to alternate uses,  including pasture,  range, forest, or recreation. Such logic prompted incorporation of  a 40-45-million-acre cropland  retirement  program  into the  Food Security  Act of ' 1 9 8 5 1741.

Despite  their  apparent  intuitive appeal,  cropland  retirement  proposals  have  never  been popular among farmers  in general and have met stiff  political opposition  from regional and

* An earlier version of this research was presented at the 1985 Annual Applied Geography Conference in Denton, TX. I am indebted to Michael E. Lewis for research assistance, to Fred Shelley,  Clark Archer,  and three reviewers Fraser Hart,  Duane Nellis and Stephen White, for helpful comments and suggestions,  and to Mary Goodman for cartographic assistance.

## ARTICLES

local interests  in rural areas  [6,  7 0 , 77, 281.  Such opposition  not only has presented a major barrier to adoption of  retirement programs but has frustrated effective implementation once adopted.  Resistance has  centered around a perceived threat to family farms  and rural communities from programs that take cropland out of production,  thereby severing ties that bind farm families to the land and reducing the local economic base. Many rural areas,  particularly i n the Plains and western Corn Belt, continue to experience outmigration and population loss i n spite of the heralded turnaround in rural-urban migration [22, 301. The combination of farm financial stress and continuing population losses in  farm regions suggests that program impacts on rural communities will continue to provide a focal point for political contention [8, 241.

Although belief in a direct causal link between cropland retirement and the decline of  rural communities may be widespread,  little empirical verification is available [4, 291.  Rhetoric has outpaced our knowledge of the structure and process of rural change, particularly the impacts of  land-use  change.  This  lack  of  understanding is  especially  ironic  in light  of  documented historical experience available for research. This paper investigates relationships between farm policy,  cropland retirement,  and rural community decline. Specifically,  it examines long-term adjustments of rural communities in the Southern Plains to cropland retirement and changes in economic structure,  using county population and number of retail establishments  as  indicators of community adjustment.

## Historical  Background and literature Review

The only major previous cropland retirement program in the U.S. was the Soil Bank's Conservation Reserve Program (CRP), created by the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1956 [6, 7, 17 1 . Under the CRP,  farmers agreed to establish permanent vegetative cover on crop acreage and to withhold it from production for a contract period of three,  five,  or ten years.  In return, the government paid farmers  an annual  rent for the  life of  the contract and shared the cost  of conservation measures. Contracts were  available  between 1956 and 1960;  the  last contracts expired in 1972. The  new Conservation Reserve differs  from its earlier analog in two  major respects [74]. First,  it i s  targeted towards highly erodible and eroding cropland. Second, only ten-year contracts are available.

Although soil conservation benefits provided the public purpose essential to political and judicial acceptance, the actual objectives of the Soil Bank's CRP were to improve f m n  incomes and reduce surplus  production through permanent cropland retirement i7,  17, 281. Program designers in the Eisenhower administration hoped to speed the movement of resources-and people-out of  agriculture.  In their  view,  these  adjustments were  prerequisite to  reducing surplus production and improving the quality of life in rural areas.  Farmers, farm suppliers, and businesses in rural communities were  not deceived by explicit conservation goals;  they perceived the implicit "adjustment"  objectives to threaten not only the family farm ideal, but the economic activity and population that supported rural communities [70, 171. As  a result, no political support base existed within the farm sector to protect the program when it became apparent that it could not stem the massive accumulation of surplus commodity stocks within the year or two expected by program designers [la. The CRP was abandoned in 1960.

The Kennedy administration viewed the farm problem not as an adjustment problem but as a market failure  requiring government  intervention f7, 77J.  The  conceptual  model guiding agricultural policy during this period emphasized the circular capitalist dynamic of technological advance followed by rising crop yields and falling prices,  generated as farmers attempted to increase their  productivity to maintain profits [7, 161. According to this "treadmill"  model, chronic surpluses were unavoidable characteristics of agricultural markets;  government's role was to protect farm incomes from price-depressing surpluses. Commodity price supports were increased,  and short-term cropland idling was  introduced as  the  most politically acceptable tool for  reducing the accumulation of surplus stocks [7, 771.  Annual  idling of a portion of a farm's  cropland base to  establish  program eligibility,  institutionalized in the  Food and Agriculture  Act  of  1965,  has  remained a hallmark of  farm  programs from the  early  '1960s  to the present [37]. Cropland retirement, as  a central tool of previous adjustment policies, was  politically and conceptually discredited until the 1980s (7, 771.

The new Conservation Reserve represents a partial return to the "adjustment"  perspective underlying pre-1960 policy. It owes its survival to a coalition between the Reagan Administration and increasingly powerful environmental interests [ I ] . The Administration views  adjustment to the market, and with it cropland retirement, as  policy goals essential to reducing the

need for federal price and income supports. The environmental community, concerned about the specter of future world famine and with images of the Dust Bowl aroused by crop acreage expansion in the 1970s, sees current abundance a s   an opportunity to remove erosive cropland from crop production [261. Recognizing the necessity of compromise with environmental interests,  the farm community has accepted the new CRP as a soil conservation program more suited  to their  needs  than  other  proposals. Two  recent  examples  illustrate  the  continuing political significance of potential impacts on rural Communities.  Participation in the new Conservation Reserve is limited to 20 percent of a county's  land area in order to reduce effects on local businesses and  industries,  and a near-panic reaction to the  1983-1984 Payment-in-Kind (PIK)  program led to compensation  payments to local farm suppliers  in areas with  high PIK participation [74, 241.

Despite its political  importance,  the empirical literature provides little support for the presumed relationships  between cropland  retirement and rural communities 141. Evaluations of the Soil Bank's  CRP  concluded that  the  program did not accelerate the downward  trend in rural population [77J.  The authors of a USDA survey designed to specifically address the issue found that most program participants remained on their farms  (61. The financial cushion provided by the CRP allowed many farm families to survive the drought of the mid-I950s, which was  especially  long and severe in the  Southern  Plains, or to make the difficult transition to reliance on off-farm jobs as  major sources of  income.

The  more general  literature  on rural population and community change  has given scant attention  to the role o f cropland retirement. Those studies that do mention the Soil Bank or cropland retirement treat the relationship to population summarily, as  an unexamined possibility  [Z, 77 ,   201.  Agricultural  economists have focused on changes in farm  structure  and its impacts on farm incomes, while rural sociologists and geographers have emphasized the social consequences of structural change for rural people and communities [2,  5 , 7 2 , 13, 15 , 78, 21, 291.  For example,  two major recent studies  have investigated change in rural population and business activity  1 2 1 ,   221.  Johansen  and Fuguitt [27l used path analysis  to examine  social and economic  changes  between 1950 and 1980  in a  national  sample  of 572  rural villages.  They concluded that a traditional  hierarchical-settlement approach,  based primarily on agricultural functions, did a poor job of explaining village population and economic growth patterns. The rural village was found to have become better integrated into the national urban system and t o   have  increased in  importance  as  an  industrial  center  and  residential  site.  Johnson [221 investigated the impact of population change on retail activity in rural counties between 1930 and 1970. Retail activity was  most seriously affected in counties experiencing protracted population loss,  which were  distinguished  by very  low manufacturing employment  rather than high agricultural employment.  Neither analysis was formulated to assess directly the effect of change in the agricultural  sector,  particularly  change in agricultural  land use,  on rural population or retailing.

The geographic literature clearly demonstrates that changes in agricultural land use as well as  changes  in farm  structure  have been  inherent in the  dynamic  and ongoing adjustment process  that  farm families and  rural  communities  have faced.  Hart  [201 has  established that cropland  retirement  is  a  highly  regionalized  geographic  phenomenon;  some  regions  have experienced massive cropland losses, while crop acreage has expanded in others. Cregor [I61 analyzed  regional changes in the  level of  agricultural  industrialization. Industrialization was associated with both changes in the level of technology and shifts in the cropland base. Despite the explicit role of land use in these agricultural adjustments, the literature on rural population change has not integrated this important variable  into analyses of population and community adjustments to the wrenching changes affecting the agricultural sector.

## Methods

County population and retail establishment numbers in the rural Southern Plains between 1930 and 1970 served as  indicators of change in rural communities for the empirical analysis. People are the basis for the commercial, cultural, and political activities that give rise to community;  change  in retail  establishments  is one o f the  most visible  measures of  community change and contributes strongly to the perceptions of community vitality held by rural people themselves.  Changes in these indicator variables were hypothesized to depend on changes in agricultural  land  use  (including cropland  retirement), farm  structure,  and  the  availability of nonfarm employment opportunities.  Details on model formulation,  the study area, and esti-

mation  procedures follow. Table 1 lists  the variables,  variable  acronyms,  and data sources; Figure 1  identifies the study area.

## Models

Models for the statistical  analysis were specified using panel formulations 123):

$$XPOP = f (POP30, XNFARM,  XACROP,  XSF,  XIC,  XCPAST,  XMANEMP,  XMINEMP) (1)$$

XRTEST  = f (RTEST29, XNFARM,

XACROP, XSF,  XIC,  XCPAST,  XMANEMP,

XMINEMP,  POP30,  LGCITY29).

(2)

The panel formulation,  in  which change in the dependent variable is predicted from an initial value of that same variable,  confers a number of advantages [9, 231.  It is designed specifically to  analyze processes of dynamic  change  using cross-sectional  samples [231. It reduces  the susceptibility of cross-sectional  analyses to aggregation error and bias resulting from omitted variables.  For example,  population in 1930 (POP30) serves,  in effect, to partially control population  change  (XPOP)  for  omitted variables  that  affect  population similarly  at  both times, including county size,  initial population density, and relative importance of crop versus  live-

TABLE 1

## VARIABLE ACRONYMS,  DEFINITIONS, AND SOURCES

| Variable Name   | Variable Definition                                                                                      | Source                                                    |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| XPOP            | Change in county population 1930-1970                                                                    | Census of PopiJlation 1930, 1970                          |
| XRTEST          | Change in number of retail establish- ments 1929-1967                                                    | Census of Retail Trade 1929, 1967                         |
| XNFARM          | Change in number of farms 1929-1969                                                                      | Census of Agriculture 1929, 1969                          |
| XACROP          | Change in acreage cropped 1929-69 Acreage cropped is the sum of cropland harvested and cropland failed.a | Calculated from Census of Agriculture 1929, 1969          |
| XSF             | Estimated change in acreage summer fallowed 1929-1969b                                                   | Calculated from Census of Agriculture 1969                |
| XIC             | Change in cropland idle or in cover crops 1929-1969'                                                     | Calculated from Census of Agriculture 1929, 1969          |
| XCPAST          | Change in cropland pastured 1929-1969d                                                                   | Census of Agriculture 1929, 1969                          |
| XMANEMP         | Change in county residents employed in manufacturing 19404970                                            | CountylCity Data Book 1940,1972                           |
| XMINEMP         | Change in county residents employed in minerals extraction, 1930-1970                                    | Census of Popiulation 1930 and CountyiCSty Data Book 1972 |
| POP30           | County population in 1930                                                                                | Census of PopLilation 1930                                |
| RTEST29         | Number of retail establishments in 1929.                                                                 | Census of Retail Trade 1930,1967                          |
| LGCITY29        | Population of the largest incorpor- ated city in the county in 1929                                      | Census of Retail Trade 1930                               |

Figure 1. Change in Population and Total Cropland in the Southern Plains Study Area,  1930-1970.

<!-- image -->

stock production. Finally, the panel form permits specification in terms of variables measured concretely  rather than as  percentage changes,  thereby facilitating model development  and straightforward interpretations.

The dependent variable  in the population analysis is change in county population between 1930 and 1970 (XPOP). Change in the number of farms (XNFARM) represents the complex of structural  changes  affecting U.S. agriculture  beginning in the  1930s;  it directly  reflects  increased farm size,  but is more interpretable as a determinant of population change. Cropland retirement is represented by change in the individual components comprising total cropland: acreage planted to crops for harvest (XACROP),  acreage summer-fallowed (XSF),  and acreage idled or in  cover crops (XIC). Change in each of these components of total cropland represents a different kind of adjustment process;  disaggregation permits the investigation of  relationships between population change and particular components.  Change in cropland pastured (XCPAST) is  included as  a measure of  the contribution of agricultural  land in livestock production to economic base;  it includes a significant proportion of  higher quality pastureland i n  addition t o  land pastured as  a normal part of the crop rotation [Ill. Additional agricultural land-use variables  such  as  "other  pasture"  or  "woodland" were  excluded;  their  inclusion effectively exhausts all categories for an approximately constant farmland base, thereby introducing serious  collinearity. The parameter estimates for those land-use variables  retained in the model therefore  represent the effect of conversion to a residual category of less intensive pasture and woodland uses.  Change in manufacturing employment (XMANEMP) and mining employment (XMINEMP) are  measures of the influence of nonfarm basic employment alternatives on rural population.  Additional  independent variables-changes in irrigated acreage, crop yields as  measures of land quality,  population of the largest city as  a measure of central place structure,  and a set  of  regional indicator variables-were not significant and had little effect on other parameter estimates;  they were deleted from the final model specification.

The dependent variable in the analysis of retailing is change in the  number of  retail establishments between 1929 and 1967 (XRTEST). In addition to the number of retail establishments in 1929 (RTEST29), population in 1930 (POP30) and population of the largest city in  1929 (LCCITY29) control for  initial characteristics,  including central-place structure.  The  rationale for  the  remaining agricultural  land use and basic employment variables is similar to that for population

change. The parallel specification implicitly  hypothesizes that change in retail establishments depends in large measure on population change [22].

The 1930-1969 interval was  chosen as  the  available  study  period  best  representing future adjustments facing rural agricultural regions in the U.S. First, the interval is of suificient length to reveal long-term adjustments; dynamic adjustments,  rather than contemporaneous effects or short-run reactions to policy or events, are therefore the primary focus. Second, the period exhibits  considerable  structural  and  institutional  similarities with  the  present.  The  circular competitive dynamic of technological  advance and falling crop prices that continues to characterize U.S. agriculture was  evident  by the  late  1930s 1161. Direct federal  management  of agricultural markets to protect prices and support incomes began in the 1930s with programs designed to divert acreage from production of surplus crops. Current farm programs represent an evolution of details  rather than approach [311. Finally, the post-I970 interval 'was expressly excluded because the Southern Plains study area is only now readjusting after a grain export boom and two oil exploration booms in  the 1970s.  Although boom-and-bust  cycles characterize the Southern Plains, they do not reflect long-run trends.

## Study Area

The Southern Plains study area consists of rural counties in Kansas,  Oklahoma, and North Texas, exclusive of the High Plains (Figure la). It is a region of continuing nation,al  agricultural significance with a dynamic history of population  change associated with change in agricultural land  use  (Figure Ib). The  post-World War  II expansion of  irrigation  in the  High Plains  has resulted in agricultural and population trends significantly different  from those in the rest of the study area;  counties  in the  High Plains were therefore eliminated to avoid potential aggregation errors.

Rural counties were defined as those counties with 1980 populations of less than 20,000.  The sensitivity of  parameter  estimates to the  definition of  'rural' and to study  area  boundaries was  evaluated  by  repeating the  analysis  for  different  subsets of  the data.  Varying the  rural cutoff criterion from 10,000  to 50,000  population, and subdividing the study area into eastern and western portions along the Flint Hills-Cross Timbers boundary, left the results essentially unchanged,  although statistical power declined at the smallest sample sizes. The presence of exurban counties and higher order rural service centers did appear to bias parameter estimates at  the  higher rural cutoff criteria. The criterion of 20,000  population minimized the problems created at either extreme.

## Estimation Procedures

The model was estimated using standard Ordinary Least Squares multiple regression analysis [ 2 7 . Counties inordinately influential on the model-fitting  process or on individual parameter estimates were  deleted  on the  basis of  influence diagnostics  (Table 2,  footnote a) [27, 321. Residual maps revealed no evidence of spatial autocorrelation.

## Results

Results of the  regression  analyses of population and retail establishment change are summarized in Table 2.  The  estimated models explain 88 and 77  percent of  the  cross-sectional variance in the dependent variables.  All variables  in the population  model except change in cropland pastured (XCPAST) are significant at the  .01 significance level;  change  in cropland pastured is marginally significant at the  .I0 level. The pattern of significance  is similar for the retail establishment model,  although fewer  of the land-use change variables are  significant. Parameter estimates for each of the models are described below;  standardized coefficients (p) are included to provide a measure of the relative 'importance,' within this particular set of data, of each of the independent variables  in explaining population and retail establishment change.

## Population model

The parameter estimate for population in 1930 (POP30) indicates county population would have declined by about 27 percent in the absence of change in any of the other variables;  its importance (p = -0.45) reflects  variation in  initial  population. Change  in  farm structure (XNFARM) is  equally  important ( p =  -0.46); employment  changes in manufacturing  (XMANEMP) and

TABLE 2 REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF POPULATION CHANGE AND CHANGE IN RETAIL ESTABLISHMENTS 1930-1970

| Dependent Variable: Independent Variable:   | Change      | Change    | Change   | Change in Retail Establishments (XRTEST) Equation 2a,b   | Change in Retail Establishments (XRTEST) Equation 2a,b   | Change in Retail Establishments (XRTEST) Equation 2a,b   |
|---------------------------------------------|-------------|-----------|----------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| Dependent Variable: Independent Variable:   |             | std.error | P        | b                                                        | std.error                                                |                                                          |
| XNFARM                                      | 2.68*"      | (0.362)   | 0.457    | 0.045***                                                 | (0.007)                                                  | 0.709                                                    |
| XACROP                                      | 0.014***    | (0.005    | 0.129    | 0.00002                                                  | (0.00008)                                                | 0.016                                                    |
| XSF                                         | 0.014"*     | (0.004)   | 0.159    | 0.00015* *                                               | (0.00006)                                                | 0.154                                                    |
| XIC                                         | -0.023***   | (0.009)   | ~0.091   | -0.00027'                                                | (0.00015)                                                | -0.097                                                   |
| XCPAST                                      | 0.008'      | (0.004)   | 0.077    | 0.0001 2 *                                               | (0.00006)                                                | 0.102                                                    |
| XMANEMP                                     | 5.38***     | (0.593)   | 0.316    | 0.033***                                                 | (0.009)                                                  | 0.174                                                    |
| XMINEMP                                     | 5.04***     | (0.732)   | 0.232    | 0.089* * *                                               | (0.011)                                                  | 0.359                                                    |
| POP30                                       | - 0,272 *** | (0.037)   | ~0.445   | 0.009** *                                                | (0.001)                                                  | 1.402                                                    |
| RTEST29                                     |             |           |          | -0.814***                                                | (0.062)                                                  | ~ 1.481                                                  |
| LGCITY29                                    |             |           |          | 0.0004                                                   | (0.001)                                                  | 0.018                                                    |
| INTERCEPl                                   | 835.9"      |           |          | 4.55                                                     |                                                          |                                                          |
| F                                           |             | 126.3     |          | 44.9                                                     |                                                          |                                                          |
| N                                           | 150         | 150       |          | 148                                                      |                                                          |                                                          |
| R*                                          | ,878        | ,878      |          | ,766                                                     | ,766                                                     |                                                          |

mining (XMINEMP) account for most of the rest of the variation in population change  (p = 0.32  and 0.23,  respectively).  Each farm  lost decreased  population by 2.7  people.  Each  new manufacturing or mining job added just over 5 people.

The effects of  changes in the  cropland base are significant  but small  relative to the other variables.  Changes  in acreage cropped  (XACROP), acreage summer fallowed  (XSF),  acreage idled (XIC),  and cropland pastured (XCPAST)  account for much smaller amounts of the variation i n   population change  (p =  0.13,  0.16, -0.09, 0.08,  respectively).  Loss  of  productive crop acreage, whether cropped annually or in a summer-fallow rotation, was associated with population  loss.  Population declined  by  about  1.4  people  for  every  100-acre decline  in either acreage cropped (XACROP) or acreage summer-fallowed (XSF).  A equivalent loss of cropland pastured (XCPAST) produced a smaller population loss of 0.8 people. In contrast,  the negative parameter estimate for cropland idled or in cover crops (XIC) indicates that a 100-acre  increase i n cropland idle or in cover crops was associated with a population loss of 2.3  people.

## Retail establishment  model

The results of the analysis of change in retail establishment numbers (XRTEST) are very similar to those for population change;  both the signs  and  relative magnitudes of all parameter estimates  correspond closely (Table 2). The number of retail establishments in 1929 (RTEST29) and population in 1930  (POP30) control for  initial  scale  differences  and  are  by far  the  most important variables  in the model (p =  -1.48 and 1.40,  respectively). The large negative  parameter estimate for  RTEST29 indicates that the  number of  retail establishments  would  have declined,  on average,  by 81  percent,  even  if  there  had  been  no change  in the  remaining measures of employment and agricultural  land use. Changes in number of farms (XNFARM), manufacturing employment (XMANEMP), and mining employment (XMINEMP) are also highly significant and are the most important variables outside of those controlling for initial condi-

tions  (p  =  0.71,  0.17,  and 0.36). As  a group,  the  variables  describing agricultural  land use changes are less important (p ranges from 0.02  to 0.15). The population of the largest incorporated city in 1929 (LGCITY29), a measure of status within the central place hierarchy,  is not significant but is retained because of its potential theoretical importance and its contribution to the stability of the model.

## Discussion

Based on a forty-year record,  including the  period when the Soil Bank's Coiiservation Reserve Program was active, a small long-term negative impact on rural population!j in  the Southern Plains can be attributed to cropland retirement. This finding does provide support for the contention that cropland retirement harms  rural communities. This effect is weak and must be balanced  against other findings.  Manufacturing employment  and the  massive  structural shifts  throughout  the  farm  sector  have  been  much  more  important  determiinants  of  rural population change than has cropland change.

The greatest impact on rural communities in the Southern Plains has come from changes in farm  structure,  as  measured  by decline in the  number of  farms.  Driven by  mechanization, technological  improvements,  and the ever present cost-price squeeze, these structural changes have affected a// farmers with considerable uniformity. The rate of farm loss betvveen 1930 and 1969 was relatively constant throughout the study area;  Hart 179 1 comes to similar conclusions for the Corn Belt. Although these results cannot identify a possible indirect effect of cropland retirement on population through an effect on farm  structure,  any such  indire'ct effect must be small compared to the effect of structural change resulting from other factors.

Although decline in farm numbers (XNFARM) is one of the most important determinants of population loss, the estimated magnitude of the effect is less than might be expsected. Loss of one farm was  associated with a population loss of about two and a half people, far less than that implied by a farm employment multiplier of 2.25  estimated for southwest Oklahoma [291 and below even the average 4.2 farm persons per farm for the period 1930-1970 (U.S. Census of Population). What might account for this unexpected result?  The low estimate may simply reflect an increase over the study period in the farm multiplier as  a  result of increases in farm incomes and purchased inputs per acre of cropland. Johnson [221 found that median family income strongly affected both retail sales and retail employment in rural areas.  Further,  the proportion of  small part-time farms  has increased dramatically. Farm families are often supported in whole or in part  by off-farm employment. The contribution of  part-time farms to county populations may be incorporated more accurately in the parameter estimate for change i n  manufacturing employment;  the  effect  of  farm  numbers does  increase when change  in manufacturing employment is excluded from the model. Finally, the multiplier effect associated purely with farm consolidation, other things  held constant,  may be small.  Presumably, the land remains in production and continues to require similar inputs and services. Johansen and Fuguitt [27] found that the number of farm supply establishments in rural villages remained relatively stable from 1950 to 1980, while retail and service establishments  as  a whole experienced serious losses.

Changes in manufacturing and minerals extraction have been more important to population change than has cropland change. Each job in manufacturing or mining was associated with a population increase of just over five people, considerably more than that associaied with each farm.  Since World War  II, manufacturing has  become an important,  and much more stable, contributor to the  economic base of rural counties  in the  Southern  Plains,  especially those counties with transportation links to metropolitan centers or with raw material or labor supplies capable of attracting industry [3, 18, 27,  221.  Improvements over time in roads and highways not only increased access for firms,  but also  provided rural residents access to employment within feasible commuting distance.  It became possible for displaced farm families,  as well as urban "hobby"  farmers, to reside in rural areas while working in manufacturing industries. In eastern Texas and Oklahoma, for example, farm consolidation coincided with increased timber and pulpwood production and with rising employment in associated wood processing mills. Surplus  low-wage labor freed from agriculture also attracted branch plants engaged in shoe and clothing manufacture as well as other mature industries. Data for change in  manufacturing employment (XMANEMP) were derived from the Census of  Population, which tabulates employment by county of residence rather than county of employment. Therefore, the estimated

effect of change in manufacturing employment  incorporates the effects of greater  access to manufacturing jobs outside the county as well as  increases in local manufacturing. Indirectly, manufacturing employment also serves as  an imperfect proxy for access to urban and metropolitan areas in general.  Most mining employment in the Southern Plains has been associated with oil and gas drilling, although coal has been important in eastern Kansas and Oklahoma. Once wells are completed, oil and gas extraction requires little labor. As a result, development of petroleum resources produces short-lived booms and dramatic fluctuations in county populations. For  example,  the population of  Oklahoma's Seminole County grew from 23,000  to 80,000  in one decade with the opening of the Greater Seminole Field in the mid-I920s, but then fell steadily to 28,000  by 1960 ( U.S. Census of Population).

Cropland change  is significantly  related to population change,  but the  effects are among the least important in the model. A decline in crop acreage,  whether cropped annually or in a summer-fallow rotation, was associated with population loss. The population loss associated with  an equivalent  decline  in cropland  pasture was  just  over  half of  that  for  crop acreage, reflecting the lower value of outputs and inputs per acre for pasture-based livestock production. In contrast, increase in cropland idled or in cover crops was associated with population loss. This inverse relationship hints at a more complex relationship between policy and rural population change than was initially expected. The most direct interpretation would attribute the  negative effect  of  idle cropland  on population to the  unproductive  status of  the  land, under the assumption that  land withheld from any productive use cannot contribute to the economic  base of  a  region.  Most of  the  increase  in idle cropland,  however,  consisted  of acreage idled to qualify for price supports under federal commodity programs (Figure 2). Seen in  this light, the results indicate that high participation rates in  the federal commodity  programs were associated with population loss. Such an association introduces additional explanations. From the  perspective of  farmers  or  the  local economic  base,  land  held  idle  in commodity programs is not totally unproductive.  Participation in the commodity programs is voluntary; farmers presumably participate because they realize more profit than if they cropped the idle acreage. It may be, as frequently charged, that participation in the commodity programs serves to reduce farm labor requirements by encouraging capital investment t2,  5 ,   7 5 ,   28, 291. Or it may be that idling cropland serves to aggravate population loss by blocking long-term landuse changes that could mitigate these losses.

These  parameter  estimates  for  changes  in agricultural  land  uses  describe  the  effects  of converting cropland to or from a residual land-use category,  chiefly  less productive 'other' pasture,  range, and woodland.  Conversions of agricultural  land between cropland categories are  far  more likely  and can  be calculated from  parameter  estimates.  Thus,  converting  land from annual crop production to a summer-fallow rotation has no effect on population. Retiring cropland to cropland pasture is associated with a population loss of only 0.6  people per 100 acres.  Idling that  same acreage of  cropland  results in a much greater  loss of 3.7 people.  In effect,  retiring crop acreage to cropland  pasture reduces the effect of  crop acreage loss on population,  whereas idling crop acreage increases the negative effect.

Although this analysis cannot isolate specific  effects of cropland idling versus cropland retirement on existing farm populations,  if  the  policy  concern  is declining rural populations, then recent commodity programs utilizing cropland idling to 'save  family farms'  may actually be worse than cropland retirement programs designed to eliminate marginal enterprises. The estimated negative effect of cropland idling on population is six times that of retiring cropland to cropland pasture, and four times that of retiring it to less intensive pasture or woodland. There may be serious economic stress placed on individual farms or farm supply and service businesses in rural areas as  a result of  cropland  retirement.  But there  is little evidence that such  changes harm communities through an effect on total rural and service center populations.  Presumably, employment and investment opportunities  in crop-related supply and service  businesses are  likely to be replaced by  similar businesses serving livestock, timber,  or other industries.

The analysis of retail establishments confirms these conclusions and provides a direct link t o  rural communities themselves.  Decline in farm  numbers is by far the most important determinant of retail establishment loss. Sources of nonfarm basic employment in manufacturing and minerals extraction are next in importance. Cropland changes are marginally significant and not  very important. Cropland retirement appears, again, to be less costly to local economic base than does cropland idling, and the effects of declines in annual crop acreage appear to

Figure 2. Change in Cropland Idled or in Cover Crops, 1929-1969

<!-- image -->

be balanced by the contributions of those uses to which crop acreage is converted. Not only are signs for the variables measuring change in employment and agricultural land use similar i n both models, but the parameter estimates themselves  correspond closely  if a  conversion factor of 100 people per retail establishment is applied.

The structural similarity between the population and retail models corroborates the conclusions  of  both Johnson [22] and Johansen and  Fuguitt [211 that  change  in rural  retailing in general, and retail establishment numbers in particular, is closely related to population change. The relatively minor divergences between the two models are attributable to differential effects of  improved transportation and higher incomes on  retailing and  population.  The  predicted decline  in retail establishments,  all other variables  held constant, is much greater  than that for  population,  81 percent compared to 27 percent. This contrast reflects  the  centralization and increased  scale of  retailing as  transportation improvements,  higher per capita incomes, and greater  leisure increased the  mobility of the  rural population.  Retailing of  higher-order "shopping"  goods has become increasingly concentrated in peripheral shopping centers in urban  and  metropolitan  areas,  whereas  retailing of  lower-order  "convenience" goods  has become concentrated within rural counties 12 7 , 2 2 1 . Decline in  farm numbers is more important

to retail establishment than to population loss,  suggesting a role for the dispersed farm population  in maintaining outlying villages that  provide convenience goods. Finally, the  relative importance  of  changes  in mining and  manufacturing employment to population and  retail establishment change is reversed between the two models;  mining employment is more important to retailing than to population. These relative values can be explained by higher wages and landowner  royalties accompanying oil field development and by the fact that  manufacturing employment,  but not mining,  proxies for access.  Recent analyses have demonstrated that higher per capita incomes increase retail activity (221, whereas access contributes to population growth but tends to preempt retail expansion 1271.

## Conclusions

In the past,  cropland  retirement programs have faced strong  local  opposition  in targeted areas. One of the chief perceived obstacles has been the fear that cropland retirement would threaten rural communities. The  return of a Conservation Reserve in the 1985 Food Security Act and a more market-oriented emphasis on adjustment by the current federal administration again  raise concerns over potential impacts of policy on rural communities. The conclusions of  this  analysis  of the  experience  of  the  Southern  Plains  between 1930 and 1970 challenge widely  held presumptions as  to the  underlying  relationships between policy and the vitality of rural communities.  In the rural Southern Plains, the agricultural sector has been important t o  rural change, and the effects of changes in agricultural land use demonstrate that there may be some truth to the charge that cropland retirement threatens rural communities.  However, the effects of agricultural land-use change are very small and are quickly swamped by changes i n  the nonfarm sector,  except where off-farm employment opportunities are virtually absent. Decline  in the  number  of  farms,  reflecting continuing structural  adjustment,  has  been the single most important determinant of population and retail establishment change.

The most significant  results suggest an  important distinction  between cropland retirement and cropland  idling relevant to the  choice of  policy tools  for  managing surplus agricultural productivity.  Whereas  retirement of land from crop production, presumably to some other use,  was  associated with a small  population loss,  transferring crop acreage to an  idle status was associated with even greater  population loss.  Chronic surplus productivity  ensures  that crop acreage will continue to decline and that rural communities will continue to bear a burden of adjustment to such  declines. The policy choice appears to be whether to manage excess productive capacity through cropland  idling or through cropland retirement and whether  to do so with or without government subsidies and incentives. Pre-1960 farm programs emphasized cropland retirement as  a means to encourage farmers to adjust to changing agricultural markets. Since 1960, policy has attempted to protect farmers more directly from markets perceived to be inherently flawed;  programs have responded to the interests of the commercial farm sector with high levels of price and income support combined with short-term cropland idling to control stock accumulations (281. Agrarian ideology has provided political support for this preference by linking cropland retirement to threats to rural communities and values. This analysis raises the  possibility that  cropland  retirement  programs,  designed to ease marginal croplands or enterprises out of crop production, pose less of a threat to the viability of  rural communities in the U.S. agricultural  heartland than idling programs designed to protect commercial crop producers.

The  relevance  of  these conclusions  to farm  policy  depends on the  extent to which  rural communities today face situations similar to those experienced by rural counties in the Southern Plains between 1930 and 1970. Throughout  much of the eastern  U.S.,  for example, agriculture is no longer the principal contributor to rural economic base,  reducing the potential importance of agriculture and cropland retirement to community vitality [3, 27,  301.  However, agriculture  remains the most important source of local economic base in the Northern and Southern Plains,  the western  Corn  Belt,  and portions of the  irrigated arid West  [3,  301.  The parallels between current prospects facing communities in the midcontinent and those facing the  rural  Southern  Plains  from  1930  to 1970  are  striking.  Population  continues  to  decline. Structural stresses and low crop prices yield a continuing consolidation o f smaller farm units into  larger  ones.  Manufacturing  is potentially more  important  to  economic  base,  but  low population densities limit the ability of communities to attract industry. Finally, federal farm programs continue to rely on the diversion,  retirement, and idling of crop acreage to manage surplus  stocks.  The  potential vulnerability  of  rural communities  in these areas to changing

farm programs is considerable;  intensive irrigation  development in the  High Plains and the mountain states may intensify the vulnerability.

At  a minimum, this  analysis  calls for  greater  attention,  both in research and in the policy debate,  to complexities  in the  relationships between rural community,  agricultural  land-use change, and farm policy. What is clear is that there is no major direct threat to rural population or retailing from cropland change. This finding raises questions. Is there an indirect relationship between retirement and rural population?  The relationship of farm programs to structural change has received much attention, but the effect of cropland change on farm consolidation, as  on population,  has been slighted. A distinction between rural communities and rural farm communities may be fundamental.  In other words, does the political issue revolve around the character,  rather than the vitality,  of  communities? Finally,  absence of  a demonstrable  relationship so  important to the rhetoric of political controversy calls into question the source of political opposition to cropland retirement within the farm community and its structural context. Is opposition, in fact, based on a pervasive and deeply held belief, supported by agrarian ideology,  in the existence  of a link between cropland retirement and some vital component of  rural community? Or does the presumed link provide merely the sentiment that rationalizes a coalition of other, more pragmatic, interests?  Better characterization of the nature of political opposition will be essential to understanding both the policy conflict and the relevant research questions.

## Literature Cited

1. Batie,  S.  S.  "Soil  Conservation  in the 1980s: A  Historical  Perspective."  Agricultural History, 59  (19851, 107-123.
2. Beale, C. L. "Rural  Depopulation in  the United States: Some Demographic  Consequences of Agricultural Adjustments."  Demography, 1 (19641, 264272.
3. Bender, L. D., et al. The Diverse Social a n d   Economic Structure of Nonrnetropolitan  America. Agricultural and Rural Economics  Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Rural Development Research Report No. 49. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office,  1985.
4. Brown,  D. L. "Land  Use."  In Rural Society in the U.S.: lssues for  the  1980s, pp. 373-381.  Edited by D. A.  Dillman. Boulder,  CO: Westview Press,  1982.
5. Buttel,  F.  H. "Farm  Structure and Rural Development." In Farms in Transition,  pp.  103--124. Edited by D. E.  Brewster,  W.  D. Rasmussen and G. Youngberg. Ames:  The Iowa State University Press,  1983.
6. Christiansen, R.  P.  and R. 0. Aines.  fconornic Effects of Acreage Control Programs in the 1950s. Agricultural Economic Report No. 18, Economics Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington:  USDA, 1962.
7. Cochrane, W.  W.  and M. E.  Ryan. American  Farm Policy:  1948-1973.  Minneapolis:  University of  Minnesota Press,  1976.
8. Cook, K. A.  "Problems  and Prospects for the Agricultural Conservation  Program."  lournal of Soil and Water Conservation,  36 (1981), 24-27.
9. Davies, R.  6. and A.  R.  Pickles. "Longitudinal Versus Cross-sectional  Methods for Behavioural Research: A First-round  Knockout."  Environment and Planning A,  17 (19851, 13151330.
10. Fite, C. American Farmers: The New Minority. Bloomington:  University of Indiana Press,  1981.
11. Frey, T. H. Major Uses of Land in the United  States:  7974. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agriculiural Economic Report No. 440. Washington: USDA, 1979.
12. Frisbe, W. P.  and D. L. Poston, If. "The  Structure of  Sustenance Organization and Population Change in Nonmetropolitan America.''  Rural Sociology, 41 (19761, 354-370.
13. Fuguitt, C. V.  "Places  Left  Behind:  Population Trends and Policy for  Rural America." Rural Sociology, 36  (19711, 449470.
14. Glaser,  L. Provisions of the Food Security Act of 1985. National Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture. Agriculiure  Information Bulletin No. 498. Wa5,hington:  U.S. Government Printing Office, 1984.
15. Coldschmidt, W. As You Sow:  Three Studies in the Social Consequences of Agri-business. Montclair, NJ:  Allenheld, 1978.
16. Gregor, H. F.  Industrialization of U. S.  Agriculture.  Boulder: Westview Press,  1982.
17. Hadwiger,  D. F.  Federal Wheat Commodity Programs. Ames:  Iowa State University Press, 1970.
18. Hart, I .   F. and N. E.  Salisbury.  "Population  Change in Middle Western Villages:  A Statistical Approach." Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 55  (1965), 140-160.
19. - . "Change  in the Corn Belt."  Geographical Review, 76 (19861, 51-72.
20. - . "Loss and Abandonment of Cleared  Farm Land  in the  Eastern United States."  Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 58 (19681, 41740.
21. Johansen, H. E.  and C. V.  Fuguitt.  The Changing Rural Village in America.  Cambridge, MA:  Ballinger, 1984.

22. Johnson, K.  M. The lrnpact o f  Populalron Change on Business Activity rn Rural  America.  Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1985.
23. Kessler, R.  and D. Greenberg.  Linear Panel  Analysis.  New York: Academic Press,  1981.
24. McCalla, A. F. and E.  W. Learn. "Public  Policies for Food, Agriculture, and Resources."  In Dilemmas of Choice,  pp. 1-22.  Edited by K.  A.  Price. Washington:  Resources for the Future, 1985.
25. Price,  K.  A.,  ed.  Dilemmas o f  Choice. Washington:  Resources for the Future,  1985.
26. Reilly, W. K.  "Soils,  Society,  and Sustainability."  lournal of Soil and Water Conservation, 39 (1984),  2 8 6 290.
27. SAS  Institute, Inc. SAS User's  Guide:  Statistics, 7982 tditiori.  Cary,  NC:  1982.
28. Tweeten,  L.  Foundations of Farm Policy, 2nd. ed.,  rev.  Lincoln: University of  Nebraska Press, 1979.
29. - . "Prospective  Changes  in U.S. Agricultural Structure."  In Food and Agriculture Pol~cy for the 7980s, pp. 113-146. Edited by D. G. Johnson.  Washington: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1981.
30. U.S.  Department of Agriculture,  Economic Research Service,  Economic Development Division. Chartbook of Nonmetro-Metro Trends. Rural Development Research Report No. 43. Washington:  U.S. Covernment Printing Office, 1984.
31. .  History  ofAgriculfural Price-Support  andAdjustment Programs, 1933-84. Agricultural Information Bulletin No. 485. Washington:  USDA, 1984.
32. Wrigley, N. "Quantitative Methods: On Data and Diagnostics."  Progress i n h r n a n   Geography,  7 (1983), 567-577.

REBECCA S.  ROBERTS (Ph.D., Oregon State  University) is Visiting Assistant  Professor of Geography,  University  of  Iowa,  Iowa City,  IA 52242.  Her  research  interests  include natural  resources  policy,  particularly farm policy and state ground water policy.

Prof e s s i o n a l  G e o g r a p h e r .  39(3).  1987. pp  287-297 L Copyright  1987 by Association  of American Geographers

## THE EMERGENCE OF REGIONAL CULTIVAR  SPECIALIZATIONS  IN CALIFORNIA VITICULTURE*

## Gary L.  Peters

## California State University, Long Beach

Centuries of evolution of viticultural  patterns in Europe have established well-known associations between cultivars and viticultural regions. Though California's viticultural  landscape is much  younger than Europe's, scholars increasingly talk about cultivar specialization in California wine regions. This study uses data for recent  years and location quotients to  test the hypothesis of regional  cultivar specialization  in California. Support is found for the hypothesis. though  not  for  each  cultivar and  region. Evidence suggests also that  there  are  significant differences  between California and Europe with respect to viticultural specialization. Two such differences are in  physical  geography and wine laws. Key Words: cultivar, viticulture, regional specialization,  location quotient.

Throughout the great European wine regions, centuries of experience have matched cultivars with  their  optimum  environments,  so  that  to  know the  regions is to  know their  grapes.  In Germany's  Rhinegau,  for  example,  the  Riesling  is  planted almost  exclusively.  Similarly,  in France, Cabernet Sauvignon  is the primary grape of  Bordeaux and Chablis  is planted almost entirely to Chardonnay. Such examples of  region-cultivar  identities are well  known and represent the results of long periods of trial-and-error as viticulturalists sought to match cultivars with the environments in which they would do best.

In California, unlike Europe, variety  has been the key word, as the example of Napa County

*  I would like to thank the reviewers, Harm de Blij and Brian Holly, for their many useful comments on earlier versions of this manuscript. I would also like to acknowledge partial assistance for this research from California State University, Long Beach.