## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag21

## Institutions, Extreme Weather, and Urbanization in the Greater Mekong Region

Han Li, Yao Zhou &amp; Yehua Dennis Wei

To cite this article: Han Li, Yao Zhou &amp; Yehua Dennis Wei (2019): Institutions, Extreme Weather, and Urbanization in the Greater Mekong Region, Annals of the American Association of Geographers

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2018.1535884

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 22 Feb 2019.

Submit your article to this journal

View Crossmark data

<!-- image -->



<!-- image -->

## Institutions, Extreme Weather, and Urbanization in the Greater Mekong Region

Han Li  , Yao Zhou † , and Yehua Dennis Wei ‡

Department of Geography and Regional Studies, University of Miami † School of Public Administration, National Center for Integrated Coastal Research, University of Central Florida ‡ Department of Geography, University of Utah

Climate change threatens many developing countries with more frequent and intense extreme weather events. Researchers, however, have not comprehensively examined how extreme weather influences urbanization and sustainable development. Based on the spatial estimates of precipitation, tropical cyclones, and temperature for the period of 2000 to 2010, we establish an eleven-year climatological record and calculate anomalies at the county and district level in the Greater Mekong Region (GMR). Combining this with urbanization data from the World Bank, we relate weather patterns to growth rates in urban population and urban land use and find that the above-average rainfall in the wet season along with more frequent cold waves and tropical cyclones tend to retard urban development. In contrast, crop failures caused by increasingly severe droughts during the dry season and heat waves accelerate rural -urban migration and the agglomeration of urban poverty. By identifying institutionally varying effects, we further find that nonsocialist countries have additional sensitivity to most weather extremes than more centralized socialist countries, which have stronger ability to mobilize resources for disaster management and relief. Our study contributes to the understanding of effects of weather shocks on socioeconomic outcomes in societies rapidly integrating with the global economy. Key Words: extreme weather, Greater Mekong Region, urbanization, urban land expansion.

气 候 变 迁 中 频 繁 且 密 集 的 极 端 天 气 事件 ， 威 胁 着 诸 多 开 发 中 国 家 。 但 研 究 者 尚 未 充 分 检 视 极 端 气 候 如 何 影 响 城 市 化 与 可 持 续 发 展 。 我 们 根 据 2000 年 至 2010 年 间 降雨 、 热 带 气 旋 与 温 度 的 空 间 评 估 ， 建 立 十 一 年 期 的 气 候 学 纪 录 ， 并 计 算 大 湄 公 河 区 域 （ GMR ） 中 ， 国 家 与 行 政 区 层 级 的 异 常 。 我 们 将 此 与世 界 银 行 的 城 市 化 数 据 结 合后 ， 将 天 气 模 式 连 结 至 城 市 人 口 成 长 率 与 城 市 土地 使 用 ， 发 现 雨 季 平 均 以上 的 降雨 和 更 常 发 生 的 寒 流 和 热 带 气 旋 ， 倾 向 妨 碍 城 市 发 展 。 反 之 ， 由 乾 季 时 逐 渐 恶 化 的 乾 旱 与 热 浪 所 导 致 的 农 粮 欠 收 ， 则加 速 了 城 乡 移 民 与 城 市 贫 穷 的 聚 集 。 通 过 指 认 制 度 上不 同 程 度 的 影 响 ， 我 们 进 一 步 发 现 ， 非 社 会 主义 国 家 较 更 为中 央 化 的 社 会 主义 国 家 而 言 ， 对 于 多 半 的 极 端 气 候 更 为 敏 感 ， 因 后 者 有 较 强 大 的 能 力动 员 资 源 以 进 行 灾 害 管 理 和 赈 灾 。 我 们 的 研 究 ， 对 于 理 解 气 候 对 快 速 整 合 进 全 球 经 济 的 社 会 所 造 成 的 社 会 经 济 冲击 之 影 响 作 出 贡 献 。 关 键 词 : 极 端 气 候 , 大 湄 公 河 区 域 , 城 市 化 , 城 市 土地 扩 张 。

El cambio clim  atico amenaza a muchos pa  ı ses en desarrollo con eventos meteorol  ogicos extremos cada vez m  as frecuentes e intensos. Los investigadores, sin embargo, no han examinado de manera amplia y detallada c  omo influye el tiempo extremo en la urbanizaci  on y el desarrollo sostenible. Con base en los estimativos espaciales de precipitaci  on, ciclones tropicales y temperatura para el per  ı odo 2000 -2010, establecimos un registro climatol  ogico de once a ~ nos y calculamos las anomal  ı as a niveles de condado y distrito en la Regi  on Mayor del Mekong (GMR). Combinando esto con datos de urbanizaci  on del Banco Mundial, relacionamos los patrones del tiempo con las tasas de crecimiento de la poblaci  on urbana y el uso del suelo urbano, y hallamos que las precipitaciones por encima del promedio en la estaci  on lluviosa, aunadas a olas de fr  ı o m  as frecuentes y ciclones tropicales, tienden a retardar el desarrollo urbano. Por contraste, la p  erdida de cosechas causada por sequ  ı as crecientemente severas durante la estaci  on seca y las olas de calor aceleran la migraci  on rural -urbana y la aglomeraci  on de la pobreza urbana. Al identificar los variables efectos de car  acter institucional, tambi  en encontramos que los pa  ı ses no socialistas tienen m  as sensibilidad a la mayor  ı a de las condiciones meteorol  ogicas extremas que los pa  ı ses socialistas, m  as centralizados y con mayor capacidad de movilizaci  on de recursos para el manejo de desastres y asistencia. Nuestro estudio contribuye a entender los efectos de conmociones meteorol  ogicas sobre los resultados socioecon  omicos en aquellas sociedades que se est  an integrando r  apidamente a la econom  ı a global. Palabras clave: expansi  on del suelo urbano, extremos del tiempo, Regi  on Mayor del Mekong, urbanizaci  on.

U rbanization and climate change have been identified as the two most significant trends to shape development and sustainability in the Global South in the decades ahead (Satterthwaite 2007; Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [IPCC] 2014a). Cities in developing countries have been serving as engines of economic growth and centers of institutional change (UN Habitat 2007; Wei 2012). At the same time, climate change, especially more frequent and intense extreme weather events, could exacerbate resource scarcity and put vulnerable communities at risk (IPCC 2014a). Less developed regions, such as the Greater Mekong Region (GMR), have experienced a large and growing number of extreme weatherrelated deaths and economic losses (United Nations 2011).

The GMR is geographically composed of Yunnan and Guangxi in China, Cambodia, Lao People ' s Democratic Republic (PDR), Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam (Asian Development Bank [ADB] 2011). Since the 1990s, the GMR has recorded dramatic urban growth both in population and territory. From 2000 to 2010, the total urban population of this region increased from 38.5 million to 61.7 million, and the total built-up area expanded from 14,312 km 2 to 17,428 km 2 (World Bank 2015). The GMR is vulnerable to weather shocks and related hazards, such as increased rainfall in the wet season, decreased rainfall in the dry season, and intensified flooding and droughts (International Centre for Environmental Management 2010; IPCC 2014b). Therefore, as one of the most vulnerable regions to climate change, the GMR ' s urbanization and its response to extreme weather deserve further investigation (Krongkaew 2004; Francisco 2008; Jongman, Ward, and Aerts 2012).

A rich body of literature, mainly by ecologists and climatologists, has explored the associations between urbanization and extreme weather since the 2000s (Kishtawal et al. 2010; Brody et al. 2014), mainly the influence of urban development and other human activities on the frequency and magnitude of extreme weather and related hazards. Only a few qualitative studies point out that extreme weather events might undermine ongoing urbanization, and empirical studies focusing on the response of urbanization to weather shocks remain very limited (Hallegatte, Henriet, and Corfee-Morlot 2011; IPCC 2014a, 2014b). Given the massive population at high risk of extreme weather, as well as its ongoing institutional restructuring (Krongkaew 2004), a quantitative study of the GMR will improve our understanding of how extreme weather events affect socioeconomic outcomes, which is critical to regional development and sustainability in the Global South (Parnell and Walawege 2011; Harden 2012; Whitehead 2013).

This study examines the linkages between weather extremes and the urbanization process across countyand district-level administrative units in the GMR. This article seeks to answer the following two questions: Do the extreme temperatures and precipitation anomalies, as well as tropical cyclones (TCs), result in decreased urbanization in both its demographic and land dimensions? How do such relationships vary across different institutional systems? We analyze the association between the growth of urban population and built-up area and the indicators of extreme weather. We also examine the variations in urbanization ' s sensitivities to extreme weather in different political and economic systems.

## Literature Review

There is general agreement that changes in the frequency and magnitude of extreme weather have profound impacts on human migration and urbanization (Kunkel, Pielke, and Changnon 1999; Hunter 2005; Warner 2010; Black et al. 2011; Gray and Mueller 2012; IPCC 2014a). The data on weather extremes have been compartmentalized into two groups: one based on climate statistics including extreme precipitation and temperatures and the other one referring to droughts, floods, or hurricanes that do not necessarily occur every year at a given location (Easterling et al. 2000). Given the climate and hazards characteristics of the GMR, we focus on three groups of weather extremes -extreme precipitation, hurricanes, and temperature extremes -and examine how they influence urbanization through hazards such as floods, droughts, and heat waves (Francisco 2008; Jongman, Ward, and Aerts 2012; IPCC 2014b).

## Extreme Precipitation and Urbanization

Extreme precipitation refers to a significant change (increase or decrease) in monthly or seasonal precipitation. Extreme precipitation has been widely linked to severe hazards that have considerable

effects on urbanization. Anomalously positive (above-average) rainfall is closely related to flooding, which leads to loss of life and property, as well as damage to public infrastructure and businesses in urban areas (Huong and Pathirana 2013). These losses can significantly affect regional and national economies, as well as urban development, which further leads to urban -urban or urban -rural migration from flood-prone cities to safe areas (Ingirige and Wedawatta 2011; Jha, Bloch, and Lamond 2012). Earlier studies agree that flooding in a rural area is likely to increase human mobility and trigger rural -urban migration, which increases urbanization rates and agglomeration of urban poverty (Hunter 2005). Recent studies, however, have found a contradictory result. Some qualitative research has pointed out that flood-displaced people tend to return as soon as possible to reconstruct their homes and livelihoods (Piguet 2008; Tacoli 2009). Gray and Mueller (2012) quantitatively confirmed that rural flooding has an insignificant impact on longterm rural -urban migration in Bangladesh. Although the critical role of flooding in migration and urbanization has been recognized, further quantitative evidence is still needed (Warner 2010; Mekong River Commission 2015). Besides flooding, studies have also pointed out some indirect influences of positive rainfall anomalies on human society. Scholars find that intense rainfall events negatively affect income equality, agriculture, and the aquaculture industry, much to the detriment of local economic growth (Halls and Johns 2013; Silva, Matyas, and Cunguara 2015). Local economic stagnation is the most important driver of urbanization and urban land expansion in developing countries.

Unlike positive precipitation anomalies, negative precipitation anomalies and associated hazards like drought have more influence on rural populations. Rural populations have more exposure to drought than urban populations, and the vulnerability of rural households is considerably higher than that of urban households (Kiem and Austin 2013; Hill and Porter 2017). Crop failures and the displacements of rural residents triggered by drought force more migrants to flow to urban areas (Gray and Mueller 2012; Marchiori, Maystadt, and Schumacher 2012; Henderson, Storeygard, and Deichmann 2017). This input of population is also potential labor for construction and urban development, in particular in developing countries.

## Tropical Cyclones and Urbanization

Storm surge, damaging winds, heavy rainfall, and inland flooding are perils associated with TCs, and all can be tremendously destructive and deadly in both urban and rural areas (Villarini et al. 2014). Similar to extreme precipitation, flooding associated with TCs is one of the most devastating natural hazards to society, resulting in numerous fatalities and enormous economic losses. The storm surges brought by TCs in Asia since 1990, including Gorky in 1991, Gujarat in 1998, Orissa in 1999, Sidr in 2007, and Nargis in 2008, caused more than a half-million fatalities in urban areas (Murray et al. 2012). Tropical Cyclone Nargis hit Myanmar on 2 May 2008 and caused more than 138,000 deaths, most of which were concentrated in urban areas. Although Indochina deltas have been identified as particularly vulnerable to TCs because of high population density and expanding urban areas (Nicholls et al. 2007), the existing literature has rarely studied the intercorrelations between TCs and urban development.

## Temperature Extremes and Urbanization

The direct associations between extreme heat and cold, migration, and urbanization have drawn scholarly attention recently, resulting in a variety of findings. The relationship between heat waves and urbanization varies across regional economic development levels. In middle-income economies, the extreme heat events increase migration to urban areas, which raises the level of urbanization. In lowincome countries, the heat extremes moderately lessen the probability of migration to cities (Cattaneo and Peri 2016). According to this dichotomy, in the GMR, all to the regions belong to the lower middle-income group, which suggests that the extreme heat might drive rural -urban migration. Heat waves mainly result in significant reductions in crop yields, because of the expanded ranges of crop pests and plant diseases. Yield loss will further lead to the movement of population from rural areas to the nearest urban area and the agglomeration of poverty (Tao and Zhang 2013; Bioforsk 2014). In the GMR, rice is the dominant crop, which is most sensitive to temperature in April and May for its heading and production. Heat extremes occurring in April and May significantly impair local agriculture production and further foster rural -urban migration. From 2000 to 2010, there were 355 counties and

districts that experienced at least five days with the daily maximum temperature higher than 40  C between April and May. The increasingly extreme heat also retards economic development and urban development by influencing the quality of life, urban environment, and economic systems. Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) estimated that a 1  rise in temperature leads to a 1.3 percent decline in economic growth. Health problems, such as elders ' mortality and infants ' birth weight, have also been linked to high-frequency extreme temperature events (Diaz et al. 2002; Grace et al. 2015).

In contrast to heat waves, cold waves have more significant influences on urban population than rural residents. Literature has demonstrated that extreme cold, rather than extreme heat, is a leading source of weather-related human mortality and morbidity, especially for the poor population in urban areas (Deschenes and Moretti 2007). Cold temperatures cause upsurges in pneumonia and respiratory infections, especially among the aged and children. Indirectly, for areas with decrepit infrastructure, cold temperatures considerably affect local water and gas supplies, as well as heating-related air pollution. Apparently, cold waves substantially retard the process of urban development. In rural areas, agricultural losses caused by winter ' s cold temperatures are highly dependent on plant types. For example, severe cold waves in northern and eastern India caused a substantial reduction in crop yields by 10 to 40 percent in wheat but only 10 to 15 percent in rice (Samra, Singh, and Ramakrishna 2003). In the GMR, extreme cold occurs mostly in Yunnan and Guangxi in winter, which will generate relatively inconsequential harm to the production of rice. Thus, the cold waves do not result in a large-scale rural -urban migration as do heat waves in the GMR.

## Political Systems and Risk Management

Two critical institutional factors influencing urbanization ' s responses to weather extremes are the government response and the local socioeconomic variables such as economic and infrastructure development levels (Whitehead 2013; Petz 2014; Cattaneo and Peri 2016). First, government ' s risk management and disaster relief, especially the capability of increasing residents ' awareness and mobilizing resources, at both national and local (district or municipal) levels, can dramatically reduce the risk from climate change and weather extremes (Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016). Awareness, improved governance, and development are essential for coping with extreme weather events. Second, the effects of extreme weather events could be mitigated by highquality housing and infrastructures, risk reduction measures of urban planning and management, a high level of preparedness of the city ' s population, and provision of crucial emergency services (Whitehead 2013).

Divergent institutional competencies in tackling weather-related disasters will result in significantly different outcomes of casualties and economic losses. For example, two cyclones from the Indian Ocean (Sidr in 2007 and Nargis in 2008) of similar magnitude and strength resulted in a significantly different number of fatalities (Cruz et al. 2007). Largely due to the Myanmar military junta ' s blockade of aid and government ' s unawareness of the scope of the disaster, more than 138,000 people were dead and missing from Nargis, but when Sidr struck Bangladesh in 2007 fatalities were limited to about 3,500 (Swiss Re 2009). The difference obviously is highly associated with the different institutional capabilities for coping with natural hazards between Bangladesh and Myanmar.

Institutional competence in coping with weather extremes is highly correlated to the type of political system. A more centralized government might have advantages in risk management and disaster relief, such as a strong capability for mobilizing resources for reconstruction, as in China, which has already shown an impressive capacity for dealing with severe hazards, like flooding and earthquakes (Moore et al. 2007; World Bank 2013; Petz 2014; Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016). In contrast, the locally dependent risk management and disaster relief system with a bottom-up style has been criticized for impotency and inefficiency. Because of weak capabilities for mobilizing resources for reconstruction, less centralized nations are likely to suffer more from disasters in the long term (Noy 2009). The countries of the GMR, with a variety of political systems, face similar threats from climate shocks. A thorough and quantitative comparison of the differences in the linkage between extreme weather and urbanization across socialist and nonsocialist countries in the GMR can improve our understanding of the role of institutional settings in the varying outcomes of weather extremes.

## Hypotheses

Based on the literature reviewed, we propose several hypotheses about how extreme weather events influence urbanization and urban expansion in the GMR. First, extreme precipitation will have a varied influence on urbanization and urban land expansion due to the different vulnerabilities to flooding and drought between urban and rural residents (Hunter 2005; Gray and Mueller 2012; Marchiori, Maystadt, and Schumacher 2012; Kiem and Austin 2013; Hill and Porter 2017). For anomalously positive rainfall, a significantly negative correlation with urban development is expected, whereas a positive association is likely to be observed for negative precipitation anomalies. Second, because of large population density and concentration in coastal areas, urban population has more exposure to TCs than rural population. Thus, TCs are more likely to retard the process of urban development, rather than trigger rural -urban migration. Third, temperature shocks have been proven to have various effects on urban development (Cattaneo and Peri 2016). High-temperature shocks lead to crop failure and consequently an accelerating rate of rural -urban migration. As to extreme cold, considering the concentration of poor population and the decrepit urban infrastructure, we believe that it will result in a slowing down of urban development. Fourth, due to more centralized risk management and disaster relief systems in transitional countries, Guangxi, Yunnan, Lao PDR, and Vietnam might experience less damage from weather shocks (Petz 2014; Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016).

## Data and Methodology

## Study Area and Time Period

According to the United Nations, the AsiaPacific region is the world ' s most natural disasterprone region, with more than 41.2 percent of people living in poor conditions in 2013. Over the past decade, this region has seen a more than threefold increase in the number of deaths due to disasters (Kuntiyawichai et al. 2015). Composed of Yunnan, Guangxi, Cambodia, Lao PDR, Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam, the GMR has the highest exposure to weather extremes in the Asia-Pacific region (Jongman, Ward, and Aerts 2012). The GMR is hugely vulnerable to weather shocks due to its unique geographical and socioeconomic circumstances. First, a large proportion of GMR ' s population lives in low-elevation coastal zones that are particularly at risk from climate change and weather-related hazards, including sea level rise, storm surges, and typhoons. Half to two thirds of the cities in the GMR are exposed to floods and TCs (United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division 2013). Second, the GMR consists of developing countries, which account for most global deaths from weather-related disasters and are more vulnerable to climate change than developed nations (IPCC 2014b). In 2010, the GMR had more than 300 million inhabitants and 2,471 county-level (the fourth-level administrative division of China) or district-level (the third-level administrative division of Myanmar, Lao PDR, Vietnam, Thailand, and Cambodia) subareas, which are the 2,471 observation units in our study (World Bank 2015).

Based on a comparison of theoretical contradictions, significance, and data limitations between the periods of 1990 to 2000 and 2000 to 2010, we selected 2000 to 2010 as our study period. First, theoretically, the literature has indicated that the relationship between weather extremes and urbanization is highly sensitive to local economic and transportation development. In 1990, the gross national income levels of China, Lao PDR, Myanmar, and Vietnam were all below $1,000, which implies that most areas of the GMR belonged to the low-income group. The development of local transportation infrastructure in the GMR was also at an extremely low level. The underdeveloped economies and transportation infrastructures trapped the impoverished rural workers, making them unable to leave agriculture and move to cities (Cattaneo and Peri 2016). Under these circumstances, crop failures caused by high-temperature shocks and negative precipitation anomalies simply had to be endured by the immobile rural poor, instead of accelerating rural -urban migration. Thus, the underlying linkage between weather extremes and urbanization is temporally sensitive, and its generalizability cannot be directly proven by extending the study period. Second, the challenge brought by urbanization and the extreme weather shocks became more significant after 2000 (ADB 2016). According to data from World Bank and China ' s fourth, fifth, and sixth censuses, urban population growth rate in the GMR was 45 percent for 1990 to 2000 and 77 percent for 2000 to 2010. At the same time, the weather extremes also occurred

Table 1. Dependent and independent variables included in the analysis

| Abbreviation                    | Description                                                                             | Year        | Data source                                                 |
|---------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|
| Response variables              |                                                                                         |             |                                                             |
| PCR                             | Urban population change rate (%) (Urbanization model)                                   | 2000 - 2010 | World Bank East Asia and PUMA                               |
| BCR                             | Built-up area change rate (%) (Urban expansion model)                                   | 2000 - 2010 |                                                             |
| Explanatory variables           | Explanatory variables                                                                   |             |                                                             |
| Precipitation                   | anomalies                                                                               |             |                                                             |
| PM60                            | Cumulative frequency of monthly precipitation 60mm higher than 11-year average (months) | 2000 - 2010 | CHIRPS, USGS                                                |
| NM60                            | Cumulative frequency of monthly precipitation 60mm lower than 11-year average (months)  | 2000 - 2010 |                                                             |
| Tropical cyclones               |                                                                                         |             |                                                             |
| TC                              | Cumulative frequency of direct hits by TCs                                              | 2000 - 2010 | IBTrACS, National Oceanic and                               |
| TCP                             | Total precipitation from TCs (mm)                                                       | 2000 - 2010 | Atmospheric Administration, and                             |
| TCAR                            | Cumulative frequency of TC precipitation events                                         | 2000 - 2010 | CHIRPS, USGS                                                |
| TCAW                            | Cumulative frequency of TC wind events                                                  | 2000 - 2010 |                                                             |
| Temperature                     | extremes                                                                                |             |                                                             |
| TM40                            | Cumulative frequency of daily maximum temperature higher than 313.15 K (days)           | 2000 - 2010 | GMFD, National Center for Environmental Prediction          |
| TN00                            | Cumulative frequency of daily minimum temperature lower than 273.15 K (days)            | 2000 - 2010 |                                                             |
| Baseline climate variables      | Baseline climate variables                                                              |             |                                                             |
| PDS                             | Average monthly precipitation in the dry season (mm)                                    | 1981 - 1999 | CHIRPS                                                      |
| PWS                             | Average monthly precipitation in the wet season (mm)                                    | 1981 - 1999 | CHIRPS                                                      |
| SMT                             | Average summer maximum temperature (K)                                                  | 1970 - 1999 | GMFD                                                        |
| WMT                             | Average winter minimum temperature (K)                                                  | 1970 - 1999 | GMFD                                                        |
| TTP                             | Cumulative frequency of direct hits by TCs                                              | 1970 - 1999 | IBTrACS                                                     |
| Local accessibility             | Local accessibility                                                                     |             |                                                             |
| DH                              | Distance to highway [m (log)]                                                           | 2000        | Asian Development Bank                                      |
| DMR                             | Distance to major roads [m (log)]                                                       | 2000        | Asian Development Bank                                      |
| DRL                             | Distance to railway [m (log)]                                                           | 2000        | Asian Development Bank                                      |
| DRV                             | Distance to major rivers [m (log)]                                                      | 2000        | Natural Earth                                               |
| Geographical control variables  | Geographical control variables                                                          |             |                                                             |
| EL                              | Elevation [feet (log)]                                                                  | 2000        | USGS                                                        |
| DC                              | Distance to coast, [m (log)]                                                            | 2000        | PUMA, World Bank                                            |
| MRB                             | Mekong River Basin (dummy)                                                              | 2000        | World Resource Institute                                    |
| Socioeconomic control variables | Socioeconomic control variables                                                         |             |                                                             |
| CA                              | Capital region (dummy)                                                                  | 2000        | PUMA, World Bank                                            |
| GDP                             | Regional gross domestic product per capita [dollar(log)]                                | 2000        | International Monetary Fund, China State Statistical Bureau |
| TSC                             | Transitional socialist countries (dummy)                                                | 2000        | World Bank                                                  |
| P00                             | Urban population [person(log)] (Urbanization model only)                                | 2000        | PUMA, World Bank                                            |
| B00                             | Built-up area (km 2 ) (Urban expansion model only)                                      | 2000        | PUMA, World Bank                                            |

Note: Log is the natural logarithm. The web site of Natural Earth can be found at www.naturalearthdata.com. TC ¼ tropical cyclone; PUMA ¼ Pacific Urban Flagship Study; CHIRPS ¼ Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station data; IBTrACS ¼ International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship; GMFD ¼ Global Meteorological Forcing Dataset.

more frequently. For instance, the cumulative frequency of negative precipitation anomalies (60 mm less than the monthly average) for each county or district was ten for 1990 to 2000 and thirteen for 2000 to 2010. Third, although data on urban land use (MODIS) and weather shocks from 1990 to 2000 are publicly available, detailed urban population data at the district or county level are unavailable for most regions such as Guangxi, Yunnan, Lao PDR, and Myanmar before 2000. Studies of longer periods are mainly conducted at the subnational level (the second-level administrative division), rather than the county or district level (the third- or fourth-level administrative division; Henderson, Storeygard, and Deichmann 2017). Accordingly, we restrict our analyses mainly to the period of 2000 to 2010.

## Data Sources and Variables

To examine how urbanization and urban expansion are affected by weather extremes, we rely on three types of data -urbanization, climatology, and local geographical and socioeconomic data. The dependent variables are the urban population change rate and the built-up area change rate in percentage, capturing urbanization and the urban expansion process between 2000 and 2010 in the GMR (Table 1). The data on urban population and the built-up areas are provided by the World Bank East Asia and Pacific Urban Flagship Study (PUMA; Mertes et al. 2015). To identify the extreme weather events and their impact on urbanization, multiple data sets of precipitation, TCs, and temperature from January 2000 to December 2010 are incorporated to construct an eleven-year climatological record for each county and district. Moreover, to control local climate, geographical, and socioeconomic differences, several groups of control variables such as baseline climate variables and local accessibility are also considered in this study.

Precipitation Anomalies. The precipitation anomaly is one of the direct indexes of the deficit or surplus of rainfall, which measure the difference between the observational data and the long-term climatological mean. In this study, the frequencies of monthly precipitation anomalies with values greater than 60 mm ( PM60 ) or less than -60mm ( NM60 ) are calculated to capture the precipitation extremes for each county or district (Manton et al. 2001). We use absolute monthly rainfall anomalies to estimate the rainfall conditions for two reasons. First, the absolute rainfall anomaly is easy to interpret and has been used in previous climatological studies and several agriculture organizations, such as the Famine Early Warning Systems Network (FEWS-NET; Dai and Wigley 2000; Feng et al. 2010). Second, previous studies defined climatic anomalies as occasions when precipitation exceeds one to three times the standard deviation or falls below one to three times the standard deviation (Hansen, Sato, and Ruedy 2012). The mean standard deviation of the elevenyear precipitation across our observations is 40 mm. Thus, in this study, we use 1.5 times the standard deviation as the threshold, which is 60 mm.

The monthly precipitation from January 2000 to December 2010, as well as the monthly average precipitation for the eleven-year period, is extracted and calculated from Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station data (CHIRPS; Mason and Goddard 2001). Developed by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the Climate Hazards Group at the University of California, Santa Barbara, the CHIRPS data set covers the quasi-global region from 50  N to 50  S, with a resolution of 0.05  latitude -longitude grids (Funk et al. 2015). It offers daily and monthly precipitation from 1981 to the present by combining in situ rain gauge observations and observations from geostationary weather satellites. Because it provides complete spatial and temporal coverage of precipitation with high resolutions, the CHIRPS data set has been used by many regional and global studies that have shown that it does an excellent job in combination with socioeconomic data (Funk et al. 2014; Grace et al. 2015).

Tropical Cyclones. We employ the cumulative frequency of direct hits by storms ( TC ), the total precipitation from TCs for each county or district ( TCP ), and the total frequency of receiving rainfall ( TCAR ) and wind ( TCAW ) from TCs for each county or district to capture the influence from TCs. The TC tracks are obtained from International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS/ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration), which provides TC center locations and storm intensity every six hours at the standard synoptic times for each day since 1851 (Knapp et al. 2010). We plot the track data in a geographic information system (GIS) to identify TCs originating from the Western Pacific Ocean and

Indian Ocean located within 100km of the GMR during the study period. To determine the possible extent of wind damage during the TCs, the radius of storm-force winds (17 m/s) every six hours is obtained from IBTrACS (Kruk et al. 2010). Asymmetric buffers of wind radius are created to determine whether or not a county or district is affected by TC wind. To estimate the precipitation associated with TCs, we obtain gridded daily precipitation data from the CHIRPS data set. For each TC, the storm period begins on the day when the TC first entered the 500-km range of GMR coastline and ends on the day it exited the 500-km range or dissipated over land. To measure the storm-total precipitation of each TC, we extract the daily precipitation grids within 500 km of track on that day. This 500-km radius is employed because it has been widely used in previous studies to separate TC precipitation from rainfall generated by other weather systems (Villarini et al. 2014). All of the grid cells located within 500-km radius are extracted and identified as daily TC rainfall. All daily precipitation cells during the storm period are summed to calculate storm-total rainfall (Zhou and Matyas 2017).

Temperature Extremes. Because previous studies have used 313.15 K as a threshold to define boiling days, our primary constructed measure of hot days is the cumulative count of days with the maximum daytime temperature greater than 313.15 K ( TM40 ; 40  C) from 2000 to 2010 (Harlan et al. 2006; Grace et al. 2015). To capture the cold waves, we count the total frequency of daily minimum temperature lower than 273.15 K ( TN00 ; 0  C; Powell and Keim 2015). The temperature data set used in this research is developed by Global Meteorological Forcing Dataset (GMFD) for land surface modeling (Sheffield, Goteti, and Wood 2006). This temperature data set is primarily derived from the National Center for Environmental Prediction ' s reanalysis (Kistler et al. 2001), which is currently available at various spatial resolutions (0.25  , 0.5  , and 1.0  latitude -longitude grids) and temporal resolutions (three-hourly, daily, and monthly) globally for the period since 1948. It is generated by assimilating a long-term quality-controlled database of land, oceanic, and atmospheric observations into a global climate model simulation and has been widely used in various global studies (Sheffield and Wood 2008).

Baseline Climate Variables. Baseline climate is widely used to determine a reference period or

' normal ' conditions in research on climate change and extreme weather events (IPCC 2001). Also, the baseline climate indirectly reflects the local human society ' s capability and tolerance for coping with weather extremes. Previous studies employed baseline climate data derived from observation records, usually with average climatic data over a twenty-year or thirty-year period to define the baseline climate (Kennedy, Morice, and Parker 2014; Baker et al. 2016). For precipitation, we calculate monthly average precipitation in the dry season (November -April) and the wet season (May -October) from 1981 to 1999 (Nguyen, Renwick, and McGregor 2014). The temperature control variables are the average daily maximum temperature in summer (June -August) and the average daily minimum temperature in winter (December -February) from 1970 to 1999 (Choi et al. 2009). Last, for each county, we calculate the average annual frequency of direct hits by a TC from the western Pacific Ocean and the north Indian Ocean from 1970 to 1999 (246 TCs total). To maintain data consistency, all of the baseline climate variables are extracted from the same data sets for calculating weather extremes: CHIRPS for precipitation, GMFD for temperature, and IBTrACS for TC tracks.

Local Accessibility. Previous studies have extensively demonstrated that local transportation accessibility has a significant influence on rural -urban and urban -urban migration and the process of urban expansion. The development of highways, major roads, and railways significantly enhances cities ' economic growth and urban expansion. Location close to a major river could be interpreted as a positive factor for urban growth, as the proximity to the river might supply more resources for people ' s lives, such as flows of freight and passengers (Christensen and McCord 2016). Therefore, we introduce four widely used factors to control for the differences in accessibility and reflect the relationship between weather shocks and urbanization more precisely. The distance variables for proximities to the nearest highway ( DH ), major road ( DMR ), railway ( DRL ), and a major river ( DRV ) are employed to capture the influence of accessibility. The data for railways, highways, and major roads are primarily extracted and digitized based on the network maps of roads and railways from the ADB. The streams of the Mekong River, Irrawaddy River, Hong River, Chao Phraya River, and Salween River, as well as their major tributaries, are obtained through the physical

layers at 1:10 m scale from the Web site of Natural Earth (see www.naturalearthdata.com).

Geographical Control Variables. With respect to geographical variables, we use the average elevation ( EL ) overlapping the polygons of each county or district derived from the digital elevation model (DEM) to monitor the association between temperature, precipitation, and elevation, as well as to capture the construction cost associated with increasing built-up area and the area ' s suitability for human activities. The raster data of DEM are collected from the USGS. Globally, cities are more likely to concentrate in coastal areas that have greater penetration of globalization and more job opportunities. Thus, the variable of distance to the coastline ( DC ) is included to assess whether the coastal areas have more urban land development. Moreover, the Mekong River Basin is subject to frequent flooding and water quality issues, including acid sulfate soils and salinity intrusion. To test whether a county located in the Mekong River Basin will have a relatively slower urbanization process, we add a dummy variable ( MRB ) to check whether the county or district is located in the Mekong River Basin. The area polygon of the Mekong River Basin is constructed based on a database of the World Resource Institute (WRI).

Socioeconomic Control Variables. In the process of urbanization in Southeast Asia, the most productive economic activities and the bulk of the urban population are mainly concentrated in the capital areas (Bracken 2015). For instance, the population living in the Bangkok metropolitan area accounted for about 54 percent of Thailand ' s total population in 2000. Therefore, to avoid the deviation caused by urban primacy, we include a dummy variable ( CA ) in the models indicating whether a particular county included a capital region. The level of economic development profoundly affects people ' s and cities ' responses to weather extremes (Cattaneo and Peri 2016). Because the gross domestic product per capita is unavailable for each county or district, we add the gross domestic product per capita in 2000 measured by dollars at the country level for Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, Thailand, and Lao PDR and the province level for Yunnan and Guangxi into the analysis to capture local economic status. The country-level data for Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, Thailand, and Lao PDR are gathered from the International Monetary Fund, whereas province-level data for Yunnan and Guangxi are collected from the Statistical Yearbook for Regional Economy of China (China State Statistical Bureau 2001).

As we mentioned in the literature review, due to a more centralized administrative system, socialist countries have a better performance in mobilizing resources for disaster relief and local reconstruction (Moore et al. 2007; Petz 2014; Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016). Existing studies have also pointed out that institutional variation across the GMR countries is likely to result in different patterns of urban development, and socialist countries in recent decades tend to urbanize more rapidly than nonsocialist countries (Li, Wei, and Korinek 2018). To isolate the influence of institutional variations and determine whether the centralized socialist countries have better risk management and disaster relief and therefore suffer less from weather extremes, we add a dummy variable for the transitional socialist countries in the model ( TSC ). For the counties belonging to China, Lao PDR, and Vietnam, we assign the variable a value of 1, and for the other countries ' counties, the value is 0. Moreover, to consider the influence of initial advantages, urban population ( P00 ) and built-up area ( B00 ) in 2000 are applied to capture each county or district ' s base condition in urban development.

## Regression Methods: Spatial Autocorrelation and Heterogeneity

The spatial effects of urbanization and urban expansion have been widely identified in the literature based on the theories of regional spillover and competition (Li et al. 2015). In this study, the values of global Moran ' s I of urban population growth rate and construction land expansion rate are 0.142 and 0.250, with a significant p -value, respectively. Meanwhile, values of Moran ' s I for residuals in simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regression are 0.107 for the urbanization model and 0.202 for the urban expansion model with a p -value at the significance level of 1 percent. Thus, four types of spatial econometrics are employed to control the biased estimation caused by spatial autocorrelation and heterogeneity.

Spatial Autocorrelation. We introduce a spatial autoregressive model and spatial filtering regression to mitigate the problem of spatial autocorrelation. For the spatial autoregressive model, the result of the Lagrange multiplier test suggests the need for a

Figure 1. Urban population change rate in the Greater Mekong Region (2000 -2010). Source: World Bank East Asia and Pacific Urban Flagship Study. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

spatially lagged model in matrix algebra (SLR), which can be expressed as

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In Equation 1, Y is the urban population growth rate and built-up area change rate; X is the explanatory variables, such as the weather shocks and other control variables; b represents the parameters of explanatory variables; W is a 2 ; 471 -2 ; 471 spatial weights matrix of these counties and districts; y is a 2 ; 471 -1 vector of observations of the random variable;  is the zero-mean error term with common variance r 2 , and q is the autoregressive and moving average parameter.

For the spatial filtering regression (SFR), we build our model based on the production function, which formally expresses the growth output of an urban system as the product of basic input factors, and all of the input factors are hypothesized to be exogenous inputs. Therefore, a production function-like model of the mechanisms driving urbanization can be specified as follows:

Urbanization ¼ A  Precipitation Anomalies b 1

-  Baseline Climate Variables b 4  Local Accessibility b 5
-  Tropical Cyclones b 2  Temperature Extremes b 3
-  Geographical Control Variables b 6
-  Socioeconomic Control Variables b 7 :

(2)

The exponential form can be transformed into a linear form through logarithmic transformation, which results in the familiar linear model:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 2. Built-up area change rate in the Greater Mekong Region (2000 -2010). Source: World Bank East Asia and Pacific Urban Flagship Study. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

We further incorporate spatial filters in Equation 3 to construct a spatially structured OLS model. Therefore, Equation 3 becomes the following:

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In this equation, yi is the logarithm-transformed of urban population and built-up area growth rates in county or district i , and Xi is the matrix containing a constant term and all independent variables in their logarithm-transformed forms. b i represents the vector of model coefficients, e i is the error term, and sf i is the linear combination for county or district i of the selected spatial filter components.

Spatial Heterogeneity. The mean value of the intragroup test between six nations (the function of RWG in R) with the expected random variance as 2 for urban population growth rate is 0.76, and the number for built-up area change rate is 0.91. Both of these outputs are larger than 0.70, which suggests that there is a high within-group similarity in nations. Therefore, there is a significant gap or heterogeneity in urbanization and urban expansion between six national groups. Therefore, we employ multilevel and spatial regime regressions to control the spatial heterogeneity (Anselin 2010).

Because we aim to investigate differences between nations with regard to the effects of weather shocks on urbanization, it is necessary to assume that effects vary randomly within the counties or districts of nations, which means that country-specific effects are uncorrelated with urbanization and urban expansion at the county or district level (Gelman and Hill 2007). Therefore, random intercept multilevel models are adapted to control the effects within the six national groups.

Figure 3. Cumulative frequency of monthly precipitation 60 mm higher than eleven-year average (2000 -2010). Source: Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station, U.S. Geological Survey. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

In Equation 5, yij refers to the dependent variable in county/district i that belongs to the country j , xij is the independent variable in county or district i that belongs to the country j , l oj is the error term in country j , and # oij is the error term of county or district i that belongs to country j .

To examine different responses of urbanization to weather extremes across the divergent political systems with their related disaster management and relief capabilities, we use the spatial regime model, which can explicitly recognize the heterogeneity of determinants across groups. More specifically, the spatial regime model is a technique that can derive the parameters that are specific to counties and districts in particular groups or spatial regimes. This model has been widely used in planning, political, urban, and geographical studies (Li et al. 2015). In our model, by addressing the variance between socialist nations and nonsocialist countries in the GMR, the effects of extreme weather are assumed to be sensitive to their political systems (Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016). We allow the coefficients to vary across two different political regimes: a regime of socialist nations ( A ) and a regime of nonsocialist nations ( B ).

<!-- formula-not-decoded -->

Figure 4. Cumulative frequency of monthly precipitation 60 mm lower than eleven-year average (2000 -2010). Source: Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station, U.S. Geological Survey. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

where the subscripts A and B indicate different regimes; gr  i ; tA and gr  i ; tB are N -1 column vectors with observations for urbanization for spatial regimes A and B , respectively; Y  i ; t   1 A , Y  i ; t   1 B are N -2 matrices including the constant term and initial urbanization of each regime; X  i ; t   1 A , X  i ; t   1 B are the N -K matrices of observations on other explanatory variables for each regime; and vi ; tA ; vi ; tB are the N -1 vectors of error terms.

## Urbanization and Weather Extremes in the GMR

Figures 1 and 2 demonstrate a significant core -periphery pattern of urbanization and urban expansion in the GMR. Studies have indicated that urbanization and urban expansion are highly concentrated in the core areas or primary cities of the GMR, namely, Vientiane of Lao PDR, Yangon of Myanmar, Bangkok of Thailand, and Phnom Penh of Cambodia (Li, Wei, and Korinek 2018). Our results are also consistent with this finding. We find that most dynamic counties and districts are concentrated in the two Chinese provinces, the two major urban centers of Vietnam, the newly established capital of Myanmar, the capitals of Lao PDR and Cambodia, and the southern part of Thailand. Urban development of Lao PDR mostly is found in its border regions with Thailand, Vietnam, and Cambodia. Comparing Figures 1 and 2, we find that the spatial similarity between urbanization and urban expansion is higher for the nonsocialist countries, namely, Cambodia, Thailand, and Myanmar, which suggests a closer correlation between urbanization and urban expansion in nonsocialist countries. Meanwhile,

Table 2. Influences from TCs in the Greater Mekong Region

| Year   |   Frequency of TCs |   TC rainfall frequency at district level |   Counties affected by TC rainfall |   TC wind frequency at district level |   Counties affected by TC wind |
|--------|--------------------|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| 2000   |                  5 |                                     3,659 |                              1,652 |                                 2,241 |                          1,122 |
| 2001   |                  7 |                                     3,229 |                              1,588 |                                 1,909 |                          1,178 |
| 2002   |                  4 |                                     1,427 |                              1,102 |                                   833 |                            614 |
| 2003   |                  6 |                                     2,491 |                              1,241 |                                 1,954 |                            948 |
| 2004   |                  5 |                                     2,906 |                              2,049 |                                 1,794 |                          1,527 |
| 2005   |                  7 |                                     5,295 |                              1,660 |                                 3,115 |                          1,309 |
| 2006   |                  9 |                                     3,844 |                              2,041 |                                 2,571 |                          1,715 |
| 2007   |                  7 |                                     3,955 |                              2,005 |                                 2,591 |                          1,583 |
| 2008   |                  8 |                                     3,812 |                              1,877 |                                 2,690 |                          1,415 |
| 2009   |                  8 |                                     3,891 |                              1,603 |                                 2,718 |                          1,257 |
| 2010   |                  9 |                                     3,629 |                              1,773 |                                 2,746 |                          1,483 |
| Total  |                 75 |                                    38,138 |                             18,591 |                                25,162 |                         14,151 |

Note : TC ¼ tropical cyclone. Source: International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Figure 5. Cumulative frequency of tropical cyclone precipitation events (2000 -2010). Source: International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and Climate Hazards Group InfraRed Precipitation with Station, U.S. Geological Survey. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 6. Cumulative frequency of daily maximum temperature higher than 313.15 K (2000 -2010). Source: Global Meteorological Forcing Dataset, National Center for Environmental Prediction. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

districts in Lao PDR and Vietnam experienced a higher growth rate in urban population than urban land use, whereas China had an opposite situation.

In terms of extreme rainfall, most areas with high frequencies of positive monthly precipitation anomalies are concentrated in the coastal regions of Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam and some counties and districts along the Mekong River (Figure 3). Interestingly, Figure 4 shows a similar spatial pattern of the negative precipitation anomalies. Similar to Zveryaev and Aleksandrova ' s (2004) finding, the rainfall variability is greater in the coastal regions and is lower in the central and northern parts of Southeast Asia. This similarity between Figures 3 and 4 implies that coastal zones have more variability in precipitation and will likely suffer more damage from the flooding caused by rainfall extremes. Moreover, it is important to point out that the slight dissimilarity between Figures 3 and 4 just happens in the primary cities, which further implies that the counties and districts with high urbanization and urban expansion rates are more likely to be located in the areas with less positive rainfall anomalies and more negative anomalous precipitation.

To estimate the influence from TCs, we calculate the annual statistics on TCs for the GMR from 2000 to 2010. During 2000 to 2010, the GMR was affected by seventy-five tropical storms, and there was a more intensive influence since 2004 in both precipitation and wind, as can be seen in Table 2. The GMR is mainly influenced by TCs from the western Pacific Ocean, and among the seventy-five TCs, only six of them were from the north Indian Ocean. Consequently, the rainfall from TCs was mainly concentrated in the eastern coastal region of the GMR during 2000 to 2010 (Figure 5). A similar spatial pattern of TC rainfall was also observed by Prat and Nelson (2013). Most counties and districts in

## Table 3. Correlation coefficients among independent variables

TSC

GDP

MRB

DC

CA

EL

DRV

DRL

DMR

DH

TTP

WMT

SMT

PWS

PDS

TCAR TCAW TM40 TN00

TCP

TC

PM60 NM60

Li et al.

| PM60 1.00 NM60 0.73  1.00   | 1.00 0.46  1.00 0.36  0.66  1.00 0.46  0.71  0.74  1.00  - 0.22  - 0.24  0.12  - 0.25  1.00  - 0.05 - 0.11  - 0.25  - 0.14  - 0.11  1.00  0.13  0.32  0.02 0.23  - 0.41  - 0.06 1.00 0.60  0.63  0.08 0.19  - 0.02 0.09 - 0.21  - 0.14  0.02 1.00 0.18  0.20  0.11  0.18  0.31  0.19  0.13  - 0.27  0.13  0.11  1.00 0.27  0.26  0.12  0.14  0.24  0.16  0.08 - 0.26  0.16  0.18  0.69  1.00 0.18  0.23  0.63  0.59  0.48  0.59  - 0.26  - 0.07 0.19  0.09 0.12  0.15  1.00 0.21  0.25  - 0.17  0.06 0.08 0.02 0.26  - 0.11  0.02 0.16  0.20  0.16  - 0.13  1.00 - 0.09  - 0.10  - 0.18  - 0.19  - 0.11  - 0.22  0.32  0.05 - 0.07 - 0.11  - 0.01 - 0.01 - 0.26  0.10  1.00 - 0.01 0.05 0.02 0.01 0.10  0.12  - 0.01 0.05 - 0.02 0.09  0.02 0.01 0.03 0.19  0.07 1.00 - 0.06 - 0.07 0.09 - 0.08 - 0.11  - 0.02 - 0.08 0.17  - 0.04 - 0.01 - 0.24  - 0.24  0.17  0.03 - 0.13  0.03 1.00 - 0.13  - 0.13  0.05 0.01 0.06 0.10  - 0.01 0.22  - 0.10  - 0.12  - 0.31  - 0.31  0.13  0.02 0.04 0.10  0.60  1.00 - 0.12  - 0.12  - 0.05 - 0.12  - 0.09 - 0.08 - 0.02 0.01 - 0.12  - 0.06 - 0.06 - 0.03 - 0.09 - 0.21  - 0.05 - 0.08 - 0.18  - 0.04 1.00 - 0.40  - 0.42  0.04 - 0.13  0.12  0.03 0.24  0.18  - 0.25  - 0.32  - 0.21  - 0.14  0.08 - 0.13 0.04 0.13  0.50  0.66  0.02 1.00 - 0.10  - 0.08 - 0.07 - 0.01 0.21  0.17  0.27  - 0.03 - 0.19  - 0.04 0.05 0.03 - 0.01 0.36  0.01 0.29  0.07 0.10 - 0.07 0.25  1.00 - 0.14  - 0.19  - 0.14  - 0.17  0.02 - 0.25  0.57  - 0.03 - 0.02 - 0.30  0.16  0.10  - 0.15  0.11  0.41  0.04 - 0.10  0.05 - 0.12  0.15  - 0.16  1.00  0.33  0.50  0.32  0.58  - 0.60  0.15  0.31  - 0.02 - 0.10  - 0.08 0.44  - 0.32  - 0.37  0.08  0.04 0.05 0.04  - 0.01 - 0.16  - 0.45  1.00                                                                                                                           |
|---|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|   | 0.13  0.17   0.52  0.16   0.36   - 0.30  - 0.18  0.52  0.16                                                                                                                           |
|   | TC TCP 0.38 TCAR 0.04 TCAW 0.25 TM40 - 0.27 TN00 - 0.17 PDS 0.45 PWS SMT WMT TTP DH DMR DRL DRV EL CA DC MRB GDP TSC 0.13 |

Note: The number of observations is 2,045.  Significance level ¼ 1%.

Table 4. Results of spatial lag and spatial filtering regressions

|                                 | Urbanization model   | Urbanization model   | Urban expansion model   | Urban expansion model   |
|---------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
| Variables                       | SLR                  | SFR                  | SLR                     | SFR                     |
| Precipitation anomalies         |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| PM60                            | - 9.739                       | - 11.71                       | - 6.114                          | - 9.466                          |
| NM60                            | 4.821                       | 4.502                       | 2.121                          | 2.386                          |
| Tropical cyclones               |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| TC                              | 32.02                | 35.16                | 8.665                   | 11.77                   |
| TCP                             | 0.010                | 0.014                | - 0.013                          | - 0.021                          |
| TCAR                            | - 9.832                       | - 11.92                       | - 4.501                          | - 5.878                 |
| TCAW                            | - 14.41                       | - 16.72                       | - 4.420                          | - 6.678                          |
| Temperature extremes            |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| TM40                            | 0.818                       | 0.934                       | 0.141                   | 0.093                   |
| TN00                            | - 0.265                       | - 0.322                       | - 0.057                 | - 0.082                 |
| Baseline climate variables      |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| PDS                             | 0.655                | 1.027                       | 1.174                          | 1.938                          |
| PWS                             | 0.219                | 0.300                | 0.131                   | 0.212                          |
| SMT                             | 5.772                | 6.554                | 0.293                   | 1.456                   |
| WMT                             | 0.622                | 0.418                | 1.154                   | 0.874                   |
| TTP                             | - 7.946                       | - 7.600              | - 6.910                          | - 7.712                          |
| Local accessibility             |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| DH                              | 7.498                | 9.519                       | - 0.513                 | - 0.597                 |
| DMR                             | - 4.350                       | - 5.469                       | - 1.221                 | - 1.707                          |
| DRL                             | - 5.588                       | - 5.551                       | - 2.056                          | - 2.121                          |
| DRV                             | - 63.85                       | - 69.95                       | - 22.20                          | - 22.60                          |
| Geographical control variables  |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| EL                              | - 2.123              | - 1.512              | - 0.858                 | 0.100                   |
| DC                              | 4.259                | 1.640                | 12.21                          | 12.30                          |
| MRB                             | - 7.655              | - 11.78              | - 27.22                          | - 35.20                          |
| Socioeconomic control variables |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| CA                              | 224.5                       | 270.1                       | 89.96                          | 135.0                          |
| GDP                             | 2.700                | 6.578                | 19.86                          | 31.67                          |
| TSC                             | 276.3                       | 315.7                       | 82.37                          | 105.3                          |
| P00                             | - 49.78                       | - 54.76                       | N/A                     | N/A                     |
| B00                             | N/A                  | N/A                  | 0.649                   | 0.796                          |
| Assessment                      |                      |                      |                         |                         |
| Intercept                       | - 578.69             | - 577.70             | - 315.63                | - 588.60                |
| Weight (rho)                    | 0.197                       | N/A                  | 0.344                          | N/A                     |
| Observations                    | 2,045                | 2,045                | 2,045                   | 2,045                   |
| R 2                             | N/A                  | 0.18                 | N/A                     | 0.29                    |
| AIC                             | 4,109                | 3,908                | 1,389                   | 1,093                   |
| MIR                             | - 0.013              | - 0.018              | - 0.014                 | - 0.012                 |

Note: Coefficients are multiplied by 1,000 to ensure better visualization. SLR ¼ spatially lagged model in matrix algebra; SFR ¼ spatial filtering regression; AIC ¼ Akaike ' s information criterion; MIR ¼ global Moran ' s I for residuals.

 Significance level ¼ 5%.

 Significance level ¼ 10%.

 Significance level ¼ 1%.

Guangxi of China, Vietnam, and Lao PDR, as well as some areas on the north side of Cambodia and the east side of Thailand, were affected by TC rainfall more than twenty-five times in these eleven years.

The extreme temperatures are concentrated in Thailand, southern Myanmar, southern Cambodia, and counties and districts located near the boundary between Thailand and Lao PDR (Figure 6). It is not surprising to find that heat waves have affected most primary cities in the GMR. Moreover, due to the heat island effect, the counties and districts with more urban growth seem to experience more extreme temperatures. For Thailand, besides Bangkok, almost all other counties and districts have experienced more

Table 5. Results of multilevel and spatial regime regression

|                                 | Urbanization model              | Urbanization model   | Urbanization model   | Urban expansion model   | Urban expansion model   | Urban expansion model   |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|-------------------------|
|                                 |                                 | Spatial regime       | Spatial regime       |                         | Spatial regime          | Spatial regime          |
| Variables                       | Multilevel                      | Transitional         | Nontransitional      | Multilevel              | Transitional            | Nontransitional         |
| Precipitation anomalies         | Precipitation anomalies         |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| PM60                            | - 8.923                                  | - 10.540                       | - 14.98                       | - 7.189                          | - 8.440                          | - 10.32                          |
| NM60                            | 4.406                                  | 2.159                | 11.33                       | 1.529                   | 1.140                   | 5.398                          |
| Tropical cyclones               | Tropical cyclones               |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| TC                              | 41.197                          | 40.44                       | 24.40                | 13.639                  | 14.90                   | - 9.370                 |
| TCP                             | - 0.001                         | 0.009                | 0.001                | - 0.013                 | - 0.006                 | - 0.137                          |
| TCAR                            | - 20.809                                  | - 27.93                       | - 28.38                       | - 11.43                          | - 37.15                          | - 3.289                 |
| TCAW                            | - 1.786                         | 23.60                       | - 23.43                       | - 0.441                 | 28.32                          | - 15.75                          |
| Temperature extremes            | Temperature extremes            |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| TM40                            | 0.737                                  | - 4.046                       | 1.196                       | 0.183                   | - 0.398                 | 0.215                   |
| TN00                            | - 0.237                                  | - 0.086              | 30.81                | - 0.147                          | - 0.079                 | 4.240                   |
| Baseline climate variables      | Baseline climate variables      |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| PDS                             | 0.785                           | - 0.388              | - 0.119              | 1.515                          | 1.083                          | 1.136                          |
| PWS                             | 0.079                           | 0.619                | - 0.231              | 0.189                          | 0.787                          | - 0.056                 |
| SMT                             | 2.069                           | 22.73                       | 9.718                       | 1.201                   | - 1.070                 | - 1.060                 |
| WMT                             | - 1.929                         | - 1.798              | - 4.404              | 1.229                   | 2.794                   | 1.870                   |
| TTP                             | - 13.35                                  |   24.97                       | 4.823                | - 10.56                          | - 14.86                          | 5.468                   |
| Local accessibility             | Local accessibility             |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| DH                              | 5.609                           | - 0.916              | 14.74                       | 2.091                   | - 6.115                          | 12.06                          |
| DMR                             | - 5.384                                  | 0.125                | - 7.500                       | - 1.799                 | 4.021                          | - 5.342                          |
| DRL                             | - 4.276                                  | - 5.599              | - 0.131              | - 2.534                          | - 3.161                 | 0.198                   |
| DRV                             | - 61.52                                  | 14.82                | - 49.10                       | - 32.49                          | - 13.94                 | - 19.52                 |
| Geographical control variables  | Geographical control variables  |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| EL                              | - 7.97                          | 19.18                | - 27.30                       | - 2.286                 | - 1.304                 | - 12.30                 |
| DC                              | 8.486                           | 23.83                | 0.476                | 10.68                   | 29.41                          | - 0.329                 |
| MRB                             | - 122.5                                  | 92.62                | - 48.41              | - 88.63                          | - 40.57                 | 17.96                   |
| Socioeconomic control variables | Socioeconomic control variables |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| CA                              | 187.2                                  | 324.0                       | 107.2                | 123.4                          | 193.5                          | 66.74                          |
| GDP                             | - 27.54                         | - 103.9                       | 23.79                | 27.64                   | - 68.18                 | 35.86                          |
| TSC                             | 357.0                                  | N/A                  | N/A                  | 128.9                          | N/A                     | N/A                     |
| P00                             | - 42.70                                  | 11.49                | - 72.58                       | N/A                     | N/A                     | N/A                     |
| B00                             | N/A                             | N/A                  | N/A                  | 0.674                   | 1.760                          | - 0.909                 |
| Assessment                      | Assessment                      |                      |                      |                         |                         |                         |
| Intercept                       | 1,565.2                         | N/A                  |                      | - 442.51                | N/A                     |                         |
| Observations                    | 2,045                           | 2,045                |                      | 2,045                   | 2,045                   |                         |
| R 2                             | N/A                             | 0.36                 |                      | N/A                     | 0.27                    |                         |
| AIC                             | 4,346                                  | 4,116                |                      | 1,776                   | 1,511                   |                         |
| MIR                             | 0.03                            | 0.02                 |                      | 0.08                          | 0.07                          |                         |

Note: The coefficients are multiplied by 1,000 to ensure better visualization. AIC ¼ Akaike ' s information criterion; MIR ¼ global Moran ' s I for residuals.

 Significance level ¼ 5%.

 Significance level ¼ 10%.

 Significance level ¼ 1%.

than fifty days of extreme heat. Because Bangkok has unique advantages and opportunities in Thailand, migration from rural areas to Bangkok to escape crop failure caused by extreme high temperatures is expected to skyrocket in the coming decades.

In short, extreme weather events vary with geography and have a spatially varying influence on the urban development of the GMR. Bangkok is mainly influenced by rainfall anomalies and extremely high temperatures. At the same time, the new capital of Myanmar, Naypyidaw, and the country ' s second-largest city, Mandalay, primarily suffer from heat waves. The two urban centers of Vietnam are significantly influenced by TCs and extreme precipitation, which further implies that floods might be the most significant hazard threatening the urban development of Vietnam.

Vientiane of Lao PDR and Phnom Penh of Cambodia are under threat of rainfall anomalies, heat waves, and TCs. The differences in weather extremes and urban development among these large cities also suggest the importance of institutional settings, which might lead to a variety of associations between urban development and weather extremes. Also, although the whole region of the GMR is facing potential dangers from weather extremes, compared with other counties and districts in their country, the major cities and the newly developed regions are more likely to experience fewer and less intense extreme weather events.

## Effects of Extreme Weather on Urbanization

After mapping and examining the urbanization and extreme weather patterns, we further conducted regression analyses to explore how the weather shocks will stimulate or lessen the urbanization process in the GMR. Because there were 426 counties or districts having no urban population in both 2000 and 2010, we removed these regions from pool observations. Thus, the final number of observation units for our regression analyses is 2,045. Correlation analysis between independent variables was conducted to avoid the multicollinearity problem (Table 3). We paid close attention to the potential for correlation between precipitation anomalies, as well as precipitation and wind from TCs. All bivariate comparisons of correlations are below the level of 0.75. Meanwhile, the variance inflation factors (VIFs) of explanatory variables are also smaller than 3.5. Ultimately, in the models presented here, no notable signs of multicollinearity appear. For all of the models, the values of Moran ' s I test for residuals show a significant reduction from the values for OLS, suggesting that the influence of spatial autocorrelation and heterogeneity was controlled.

Table 4 reports model outputs for estimations of parameters of precipitation anomalies, extreme temperatures, and TC variables for both spatial lag and filtering regressions. The weather extremes have a variety of impacts on urbanization in the GMR. First, the regions that have experienced a greater frequency of anomalously positive monthly precipitation ( PM60 ), more cold days ( TN00 ), and a greater frequency of rainfall and wind events associated with TCs ( TCAR and TCAW ) have experienced less urban in-migration and land development. Second, in contrast to our expectation, the coefficients of NM60 and TM40 are only marginally significant and positive, which implies that although greater frequency of anomalously negative precipitation and extreme high temperatures tend to trigger more rural -urban migrations, only part of them migrate within the same county or district. Third, we see the anticipated results from control variable groups. Better accessibility facilitates urbanization and urban expansion. Regions in transitional countries and capital areas are inclined to have more growth in urban population and land use. Finally, the Mekong River is the most essential mode of transportation for these climate-related migrants.

The comparison between urbanization and urban expansion models also produces several findings. First, the extreme weather events caused by TCs have more impact on physical urban development, whereas the extreme temperatures profoundly affect humanity itself in terms of mortality and morbidity (Deschenes and Moretti 2007). Second, local transport accessibility plays a more significant role in determining population migration than urban expansion. Third, economic development cannot be directly linked to the level of urbanization but could explain the process of urban expansion.

In Table 5, we present the results of multilevel and spatial regime regressions. The multilevel regression suggests a relationship between extreme weather and urban development similar to the spatial lag and filtering regressions, whereas the spatial regime regression reveals an institutionally and politically varying linkage between extreme weather and urbanization. First, the variables of precipitation anomalies have more significant effects in both urbanization and urban expansion models for nonsocialist countries. Although the precipitation anomalies are more likely to occur in coastal areas, mainly in Vietnam, Lao PDR, Cambodia, and Myanmar, more significant relationships between precipitation anomalies and urbanization are found in nonsocialist countries. This contrast can be explained by different capabilities in risk management and disaster relief, as well as restrictions on rural -urban migration. The centralized governments in transitional countries have advantages in risk management and disaster relief, especially for severe hazards, such as floods and earthquakes. In addition, transitional countries have more restrictions, such as the household registration system, which also

limit the inflow of rural refugees (Moore et al. 2007; World Bank 2013; Petz 2014; Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016; Li, Wei, and Korinek 2018).

Second, the TCs have more influence on nonsocialist countries ' urbanization but fewer impacts on the process of urban expansion. As we stated in previous sections, China and Vietnam have more exposure to TCs and, consequently, socialist countries ' land urbanization is more sensitive to TCs than other nations. Socialist countries have better risk management and disaster relief programs in dealing with the fierce wind, heavy rainfall, and flooding brought by TCs, however (Petz 2014). Because of the existence of household registration and better capability in coping with disasters, extreme weatherrelated rural -urban migration is less frequent in the transitional nations. The TCs might generate more refugees in urban areas in nonsocialist countries.

Third, the effects of temperature extremes are mainly concentrated in the demographic urbanization process in nonsocialist nations. Two explanations are suggested. First, socialist countries have a better capability to cope with crop losses related to heat waves by reallocating resources (Chen, Zhang, and Hsu 2016). Second, due to the existence of the household registration system that restrains rural -urban migration, the displaced rural residents associated with hot days in socialist countries rarely freely move to urban areas (Li et al. 2015; Li, Wei, and Korinek 2018). Compared with precipitation anomalies and TCs, temperature extremes have a relatively slighter impact on urbanization and urban expansion in the GMR.

In short, weather extremes, such as precipitation anomalies, cold and hot weather, as well as TCs, collectively shape the processes of urbanization in the GMR. The dynamics are also sensitive to the types of weather extremes, dimensions of urban development, and political systems. First, aboveaverage rainfall, more frequent cold waves, and TCs tend to lessen urban development, whereas the increasingly severe droughts and heat waves during the dry season accelerate the process of urbanization. Second, precipitation anomalies and TCs have a more pernicious influence on urban development than temperature extremes. Third, extreme temperatures significantly affect urbanization, whereas the extreme weather events related to TCs have more impacts on urban expansion. Fourth, due to different institutional circumstances, especially the various governmental capabilities in risk management and disaster relief, the correlations between urbanization and extreme weather differ substantially across the political spectrum. Extreme weather events are more likely to have relatively greater impact on nonsocialist countries ' urbanization.

## Conclusion

Studies of interactions between people and the environment are central to geography, but the literature on the association between urban areas and climate extremes has been dominated by physical perspectives (Grace et al. 2015). Based on the experience of sub-Saharan Africa, the United States, and South Asia, the existing literature, mainly relying on qualitative methods, has partially demonstrated how extreme weather influences urbanization. The effects of weather extremes on society are complex, however (Jasanoff 2010; Bulkeley et al. 2011). Urban responses to climate change are inextricably linked to global change, institutional restructuring, and local contexts. A study focusing on the GMR, one of the most vulnerable world regions, to address how climate extremes shape the urbanization process can provide a better understanding of the linkage between extreme weather and socioeconomic outcomes (IPCC 2014b).

This study integrates analytical techniques from climatology and urban economic geography and shows that mixed data sources and interdisciplinary approaches can improve understanding of weatherrelated effects on socioeconomic outcomes. The results suggest that growth rates of urban population and built-up areas are negatively associated with the incidence of positive abnormal precipitation at the month level, the frequency of impacts from TCs, and the frequency of cold days. Negative rainfall anomalies and heat waves, as well as the related drought and crop failure, are likely to accelerate rural -urban migration. Furthermore, for countries with different political systems, the effects of weather extremes on urbanization vary. In general, extreme weather events are more likely to have relatively more intense effects on nonsocialist countries ' urbanization.

Much of the research on climate change and societal outcomes is motivated by an interest in quantifying the human impacts of climate change (Kishtawal et al. 2010; Brody et al. 2014). Our

study has two significant findings and relevant policy suggestions, which contribute to a better understanding of the effects of climate change from the perspective of human geographers and social scientists (Silva and Matyas 2014). First, extreme weather and climate events, such as increased positive precipitation anomalies and TCs, will retard urban development in developing countries. This result will have a negative consequence for shortand long-term economic development because most developing countries depend on urbanization to eliminate poverty and improve their infrastructure systems for economic growth (UN Habitat 2007). We find that there might be long-term climaterelated development challenges for the Global South. Second, the impact of extreme weather and associated hazards on urbanization depends on states ' capabilities with respect to risk management and disaster relief, which are further related to a country ' s political and economic system. Privatization and market-oriented governance might be less efficient than a better coordinated risk management and disaster relief system in facing climate change challenges (Whitehead 2013).

Finally, future studies should focus on finer scale analysis and the changing dynamics associated with temporal variations. First, with more migration data and social media technology, future studies can directly link weather extremes to migration decisions at the individual or household level, which can provide a deeper understanding of weather-related effects on socioeconomic outcomes (Deschenes and Moretti 2007; Gray and Mueller 2012). Second, scholars have pointed out that weather-related effects are sensitive to economic development levels (Cattaneo and Peri 2016). Because a region might have a changed income and infrastructure development levels at different time stages, further studies focusing on the temporally varying association between weather extremes and local urban development are also needed.

## Acknowledgment

We appreciate the valuable comments from the anonymous reviewers.

## Funding

We acknowledge funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (41701183,

41871169) and the U.S. National Science Foundation (1759746).

## ORCID

Han Li http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4579-9552

## References

- Anselin, L. 2010. Thirty years of spatial econometrics. Papers in Regional Science 89 (1):3 -25.
- Asian Development Bank. 2011. Greater Mekong subregion urban development strategic framework (2015 -2022) . Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
- ---. 2016. Urban development in the Greater Mekong subregion . Mandaluyong City, Philippines: Asian Development Bank.
- Baker, D. J., A. J. Hartley, S. H. M. Butchart, and S. G. Willis. 2016. Choice of baseline climate data impacts projected species ' responses to climate change. Global Change Biology 22 (7):2392 -2404.
- Bioforsk (Norwegian Institute for Agricultural and Environmental Research). 2014. Climate change and impacts on rice production in Vietnam: Pilot testing of potential adaptation and mitigation measures . Hanoi, Vietnam: Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Royal Norwegian Embassy.
- Black, R., W. N. Adger, N. W. Arnell, S. Dercon, A. Geddes, and D. S. G. Thomas. 2011. The effect of environmental change on human migration. Global Environmental Change 21:S3 -S11.
- Bracken, G. 2015. Asian cities: Colonial to global . Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
- Brody, B., R. Blessing, A. Sebastian, and P. Bedient. 2014. Examining the impact of land use/land cover characteristics on flood losses. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management 57 (8):1252 -65.
- Bulkeley, H., V. Castan-Broto, M. Hodson, and S. Marvin, eds. 2011. Cities and low carbon transitions . London and New York: Routledge.
- Cattaneo, C., and G. Peri. 2016. The migration response to increasing temperatures. Journal of Development Economics 122:127 -46.
- Chen, K. Z., Q. Zhang, and C. Hsu. 2016. Earthquake lessons from China: Coping and rebuilding strategies . Washington, DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.
- China State Statistical Bureau. 2001. China statistical yearbook for regional economy . Beijing: China Statistical Press.
- Choi, G., D. Collins, G. Ren, B. Trewin, M. Baldi, Y. Fukuda, M. Afzaal, et al. 2009. Changes in means and extreme events of temperature and precipitation in the Asia-Pacific network region, 1955 -2007. International Journal of Climatology 29 (13):1906 -25.

- Christensen, P., and G. C. McCord. 2016. Geographic determinants of China ' s urbanization. Regional Science and Urban Economics 59:90 -102.
- Cruz, R. V., H. Harasawa, M. Lal, S. Wu, Y. Anokhin, B. Punsalmaa, Y. Honda, M. Jafari, C. Li, and N. Huu Ninh. 2007. Asia climate change: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Dai, A., and T. M. L. Wigley. 2000. Global patterns of ENSO-induced precipitation. Geophysical Research Letters 27 (9):1283 -86.
- Dell, M., B. F. Jones, and B. Olken. 2012. Temperature shocks and economic growth evidence from the last half-century. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (3):66 -95.
- Deschenes, O., and E. Moretti. 2007. Extreme weather events, mortality and migration. Working Paper 13227, NBER Working Paper Series, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
- Diaz, J., A. Jordan, R. Garcia, C. Lopez, J. C. Alberdi, E. Hernandez, and A. Otero. 2002. Heat waves in Madrid 1986 -1997: Effects on the health of the elderly. International Archives of Occupational and Environmental Health 75 (3):163 -70.
- Easterling, D. R., G. A. Meehl, C. Parmesan, S. A. Changnon, T. R. Karl, and L. O. Mearns. 2000. Climate extremes: Observations, modeling, and impacts. Science 289 (5487):2068 -74.
- Feng, J., L. Wang, W. Chen, S. K. Fong, and K. C. Leong. 2010. Different impacts of two types of Pacific Ocean warming on Southeast Asian rainfall during boreal winter. Journal of Geophysical Research 115:D24122.
- Francisco, H. A. 2008. Adaptation to climate change: Needs and opportunities in Southeast Asia. ASEAN Economic Bulletin 25 (1):7 -19.
- Funk, C., A. Hoell, S. Shukla, I. Blad  e, B. Liebmann, J. B. Roberts, F. R. Robertson, and G. Husak. 2014. Predicting east African spring droughts using Pacific and Indian Ocean sea surface temperature indices. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions 11 (3):3111 -36.
- Funk, C., A. Verdin, J. Michaelsen, P. Peterson, D. Pedreros, and G. Husak. 2015. A global satellite assisted precipitation climatology. Earth System Science Data 7 (2):275 -87.
- Gelman, A., and J. Hill. 2007. Data analysis using regression and multilevel/hierarchical models . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Grace, K., F. Davenport, H. Hanson, C. Funk, and S. Shukla. 2015. Linking climate change and health outcomes: Examining the relationship between temperature, precipitation and birth weight in Africa. Global Environmental Change 35:125 -37.
- Gray, C. L., and V. Mueller. 2012. Natural disasters and population mobility in Bangladesh. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (16):6000 -6005.
- Hallegatte, S., F. Henriet, and J. Corfee-Morlot. 2011. The economics of climate change impacts and policy

benefits at city scale: A conceptual framework. Climatic Change 104 (1):51 -87.

- Halls, A. S., and M. Johns. 2013. Assessment of the vulnerability of the Mekong Delta Pangasius catfish industry to development and climate change in the Lower Mekong Basin. Report prepared for the Sustainable Fisheries Partnership. Lower Stoke, UK: Johns Associates Limited.
- Hansen, J., M. Sato, and R. Ruedy. 2012. Perception of climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 109 (37):14726 -27.
- Harden, C. P. 2012. Framing and reframing questions of human -environment interactions. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 102 (4):737 -47.
- Harlan, S. L., A. J. Brazel, L. Prashad, W. L. Stefanov, and L. Larsen. 2006. Neighborhood microclimates and vulnerability to heat stress. Social Science &amp; Medicine (1982) 63 (11):2847 -63.
- Henderson, J. V., A. Storeygard, and U. Deichmann. 2017. Has climate change driven urbanization in Africa? Journal of Development Economics 124:60 -82.
- Hill, V. R., and C. Porter. 2017. Vulnerability to drought and food price shocks: Evidence from Ethiopia. World Development 96:65 -77.
- Hunter, L. M. 2005. Migration and environmental hazards. Population and Environment 26 (4):273 -302.
- Huong, H. T. L., and A. Pathirana. 2013. Urbanization and climate change impacts on future urban flooding in Can Tho city, Vietnam. Hydrology and Earth System Sciences 17 (1):379 -94.
- Ingirige, B., and G. Wedawatta. 2011. Impacts of flood hazards on small and medium sized companies. In Flood hazards: Impacts and responses for the built environment , ed. J. Lamond, C. Booth, and F. Hammond, 269 -278. Boca Raton, FL: CRC.
- Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001. Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability . Geneva, Switzerland: World Meteorological Organization.
- ---. 2014a. Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part A: global and sectoral aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 2014b. Climate change 2014: Impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability. Part B: Regional aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- International Centre for Environmental Management. 2010. Strategic environmental assessment of hydropower on the Mekong Mainstream . Hanoi, Vietnam: The Mekong River Commission.
- Jasanoff, S. 2010. A new climate of society. Theory, Culture &amp; Society 27 (2 -3):233 -53.
- Jha, A. K., R. Bloch, and J. Lamond. 2012. Cities and flooding: A guide to integrated urban flood risk management for the 21st century . Washington, DC: The World Bank.
- Jongman, B., P. J. Ward, and J. C. J. H. Aerts. 2012. Global exposure to river and coastal flooding: Long

term trends and changes. Global Environmental Change 22 (4):823 -35.

- Kennedy, J., C. Morice, and D. Parker. 2014. Global and regional climate in 2013. Weather 69 (12):333 -38.
- Kiem, A. S., and E. K. Austin. 2013. Drought and the future of rural communities: Opportunities and challenges for climate change adaptation in regional Victoria, Australia. Global Environmental Change 23 (6):1615 -26.
- Kishtawal, C. M., D. Niyogi, M. Tewari, R. A. Pielke, and J. M. Shepherd. 2010. Urbanization signature in the observed heavy rainfall climatology over India. International Journal of Climatology 30 (13):1908 -16.
- Kistler, R., E. Kalnay, W. Collins, S. Saha, G. White, J. Woollen, M. Chelliah, et al. 2001. The NCEP -NCAR 50-year reanalysis: Monthly means CD -ROM and documentation. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 82 (2):247 -67.
- Knapp, K. R., M. C. Kruk, D. H. Levinson, H. J. Diamond, and C. J. Neumann. 2010. The International Best Track Archive for Climate Stewardship (IBTrACS): Unifying tropical cyclone data. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 91 (3):363 -76.
- Krongkaew, M. 2004. The development of the Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS): Real promise or false hope? Journal of Asian Economics 15 (5):977 -98.
- Kruk, M., E. Gibney, D. Levinson, and M. Squires. 2010. The climatology of inland winds from tropical cyclones in the Eastern United States. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 49 (7):1538 -47.
- Kunkel, K. E., R. A. Pielke, and S. A. Changnon. 1999. Temporal fluctuations in weather and climate extremes that cause economic and human health impacts: A review. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 80 (6):1077 -98.
- Kuntiyawichai, K., V. Plermkamon, R. Jayakumar, and Q. V. Dau. 2015. Climate change vulnerability mapping for Greater Mekong Sub-Region . Bangkok, Thailand: Asia and Pacific Regional Bureau for Education of United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
- Li, H., Y. H. D. Wei, and K. Korinek. 2018. Modeling urban expansion in the transitional Greater Mekong Region. Urban Studies 55 (8):1729 -48.
- Li, H., Y. H. D. Wei, F. H. F. Liao, and Z. Huang. 2015. Administrative hierarchy and urban land expansion in transitional China. Applied Geography 56:177 -86.
- Manton, M. J., P. M. Della-Marta, M. R. Haylock, K. J. Hennessy, N. Nicholls, L. E. Chambers, D. A. Collins, et al. 2001. Trends in extreme daily rainfall and temperature in Southeast Asia and the South Pacific: 1916 -1998. International Journal of Climatology 21 (3):269 -84.
- Marchiori, L., J. Maystadt, and S. Schumacher. 2012. The impact of weather anomalies on migration in subSaharan Africa. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 63 (3):355 -74.
- Mason, S. J., and L. Goddard. 2001. Probabilistic precipitation anomalies associated with ENSO. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 82 (4):619 -38.
- Mekong River Commission. 2015. Annual Mekong flood report 2014 . Hanoi, Vietnam: The Mekong River Commission.
- Mertes, C. M., A. Schneider, D. Sulla-Menashe, A. J. Tatem, and B. Tan. 2015. Detecting change in urban areas at continental scales with MODIS data. Remote Sensing of Environment 158:331 -47.
- Moore, M., H. R. Trujillo, B. K. Stearns, R. Basurtodavila, and D. Evans. 2007. Models of relief: Learning from exemplary practices in international disaster management . Santa Monica, CA: RAND Center for Domestic and International Health Security.
- Murray, B. J., D. O ' Sullivan, J. D. Atkinson, and M. E. Webb. 2012. Ice nucleation by particles immersed in supercooled cloud droplets. Chemical Society Reviews 41 (19):6519 -54.
- Nguyen, D. Q., J. Renwick, and J. McGregor. 2014. Variations of surface temperature and rainfall in Vietnam from 1971 to 2010. International Journal of Climatology 34 (1):249 -64.
- Nicholls, R. J., P. P. Wong, V. R. Burkett, J. O. Codignotto, J. E. Hay, R. F. McLean, S. Ragoonaden, and C. D. Woodroffe. 2007. Coastal system and lowlying areas. In Climate change 2007: Impacts, adaption, and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , ed. M. L. Parry, O. F. Canziani, J. P. Palutikof, P. J. Linden, and C. E. Hanson, 315 -56. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Noy, I. 2009. The macroeconomic consequences of disasters. Journal of Development Economics 88 (2):221 -31.
- Parnell, S., and R. Walawege. 2011. Sub-Saharan African urbanization and global environmental change. Global Environmental Change 21:S12 -S20.
- Petz, D. 2014. Strengthening regional and national capacity for disaster risk management: The case of ASEAN. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, Project on Internal Displacement.
- Piguet, E. 2008. Climate change and forced migration. Research Paper No. 153, New Issues in Refugee Research Series, UNHCR, Geneva, Switzerland.
- Powell, E. J., and B. D. Keim. 2015. Trends in daily temperature and precipitation extremes for the southeastern United States: 1948 -2012. Journal of Climate 28 (4):1592 -1612.
- Prat, O. P., and B. R. Nelson. 2013. Mapping the world ' s tropical cyclone rainfall contribution over land using the TRMM multi-satellite precipitation analysis. Water Resources Research 49 (11):7236 -54.
- Samra, J. S., G. Singh, and Y. S. Ramakrishna. 2003. Cold wave of 2002 -03 impact on agriculture. Information Bulletin ICAR , 1 -2.
- Satterthwaite, D. 2007. Climate change and urbanization: Effects and implications for urban governance. Paper presented at the United Nations Expert Group Meeting on Population Distribution, Urbanization, Internal Migration and Development, New York.
- Sheffield, J., G. Goteti, and E. F. Wood. 2006. Development of a 50-year high resolution global dataset of meteorological forcings for land surface modeling. Journal of Climate 19 (13):3088 -3111.
- Sheffield, J., and E. F. Wood. 2008. Global trends and variability in soil moisture and drought characteristics, 1950 -2000, from observation-driven simulations

of the terrestrial hydrologic cycle. Journal of Climate 21 (3):432 -58.

- Silva, J. A., and C. J. Matyas. 2014. Relating rainfall patterns to agricultural income: Implications for rural development in Mozambique. Weather, Climate, and Society 6 (2):218 -36.
- Silva, J. A., C. J. Matyas, and B. Cunguara. 2015. Regional inequality and polarization in the context of concurrent extreme weather and economic shocks. Applied Geography 61:105 -116.
- Swiss Re. 2009. Natural catastrophes and man-made disasters in 2008: North America and Asia suffer heavy losses. Sigma No. 2/2009. Z € urich, Switzerland: Swiss Reinsurance Company Ltd.
- Tacoli, C. 2009. Crisis or adaptation? Migration and climate change in a context of high mobility. Environment &amp; Urbanization 21 (2):513 -25.
- Tao, F., and Z. Zhang. 2013. Climate change, high-temperature stress, rice productivity, and water use in Eastern China: A new superensemble-based probabilistic projection. Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology 52 (3):531 -50.
- United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division. 2013. World population prospects: The 2012 revision . New York: United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division.
- UN Habitat. 2007. Enhancing urban safety and security: Global report on human settlements 2007 . London: Earthscan.
- United Nations. 2011. World urbanization prospects: The 2011 revision . New York: United Nations.
- Villarini, G., R. Goska, J. A. Smith, and G. A. Vecchi. 2014. North Atlantic tropical cyclones and U.S. flooding. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 95 (9):1381 -88.
- Warner, K. 2010. Global environmental change and migration: Governance challenges. Global Environmental Change 20 (3):402 -13.
- Wei, Y. H. D. 2012. Restructuring for growth in urban China: Transitional institutions, urban development, and spatial transformation. Habitat International 36 (3):396 -405.
- Whitehead, M. 2013. Neoliberal urban environmentalism and the adaptive city: Towards a critical urban theory and climate change. Urban Studies 50 (7):1348 -67.
- World Bank. 2013. World development report 2014: Risk and opportunity -Managing risk for development . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- ---. 2015. East Asia ' s changing urban landscape . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Zhou, Y., and C. J. Matyas. 2017. Spatial characteristics of storm-total rainfall swaths associated with tropical cyclones over the Eastern United States. International Journal of Climatology 37 (S1):557 -69.
- Zveryaev, I. I., and M. P. Aleksandrova. 2004. Differences in rainfall variability in the South and Southeast Asian summer monsoons. International Journal of Climatology 24 (9):1091 -1107.

HAN LI is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography and Regional Studies at the University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33124. E-mail: han.li@miami.edu. His research uses the technical advancements in GIS spatial modeling, remote sensing, and spatial statistics to examine the dynamics and consequences of urbanization and urban expansion in developing countries.

YAO ZHOU is a Postdoctoral Associate in the School of Public Administration and National Center for Integrated Coastal Research, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816. E-mail: Yao.Zhou@ucf.edu. Her research uses GIS techniques and spatiotemporal methods to better understand tropical cyclone rainfall patterns, natural hazards, and social vulnerability.

YEHUA DENNIS WEI is a Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. E-mail: wei@geog.utah.edu. He is an economic/urban geographer and China specialist, with research interests in globalization, urbanization, and regional and sustainable development.