<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

ISSN: 0004-5608 (Print) 1467-8306 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## Adapting to Climate Change in Andean Ecosystems: Landscapes, Capitals, and Perceptions Shaping Rural Livelihood Strategies and Linking Knowledge Systems

Corinne Valdivia , Anji Seth , Jere L. Gilles , Magali García , Elizabeth Jiménez , Jorge Cusicanqui , Fredy Navia &amp; Edwin Yucra

To cite this article: Corinne Valdivia , Anji Seth , Jere L. Gilles , Magali García , Elizabeth Jiménez , Jorge Cusicanqui , Fredy Navia &amp; Edwin Yucra (2010) Adapting to Climate Change in Andean Ecosystems: Landscapes, Capitals, and Perceptions Shaping Rural Livelihood Strategies and Linking Knowledge Systems, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 100:4, 818-834, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2010.500198

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2010.500198

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 15 Sep 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1511

View related articles

Citing articles: 72 View citing articles

曲

<!-- image -->

## Adapting to Climate Change in Andean Ecosystems: Landscapes, Capitals, and Perceptions Shaping Rural Livelihood Strategies and Linking Knowledge Systems

Corinne Valdivia, ∗ Anji Seth, † Jere L. Gilles, ‡ Magali Garc´ ıa, § Elizabeth Jim´ enez, ¶ Jorge Cusicanqui, § Fredy Navia, § and Edwin Yucra §

∗ Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics, University of Missouri

‡ Department of Rural Sociology, University of Missouri

† Department of Geography, University of Connecticut

§ Instituto de Investigaciones Agropecuarias y de Recursos Naturales, Facultad de Agronom´ ıa, Universidad Mayor San Andr´ es ¶ CIDES Postgrado en Ciencias del Desarrollo, Universidad Mayor San Andr´ es

In the Bolivian Altiplano, indigenous systems for dealing with weather and climate risk are failing or being lost as a result of migration, climate change, and market integration. Andean rural communities are particularly vulnerable to changing social and environmental conditions. Changing climate over the past forty years and current forecast models point to increasing temperatures and later onset of rains during the growing season. Current meteorological models are coarse grained and not well suited to the complex topology of the Andes-so local-scale information is required for decisions. This article outlines a process for developing new local knowledge that can be used to enhance adaptive processes. This is a three-step process that includes assessment of local knowledge, the development of future scenarios, and the use of participatory research methods to identify alternative adaptation strategies. Initial analyses based on the survey of 330 households in nine communities indicate that northern Alitplano communities are more vulnerable than central Altiplano ones. In both areas, losses from climate shocks are high, but the types of hazards vary by location. The use of local knowledge indicators of climate is declining, and downscaling of climate forecasts is unlikely to occur due to the lack of data points and the large number of microclimates. Participatory mapping and research, where knowledge is shared, are processes that enhance adaptive capacity and are critical to building resilience. This article outlines a strategy for linking science-based and indigenous methods to develop early warning systems that are an important part of coping strategies. This approach combines science and indigenous knowledge to enhance adaptive capacity. Key Words: adaptation, climate change, knowledge systems, livelihoods, mapping.

在玻利维亚高原，处理天气和气候风险的原生系统正趋于失败，或作为移民，气候变化，和市场一体化的结果 正在丧失。安第斯农村社区特别容易受到变化的社会和环境条件的影响。过去40年变化的气候和目前的气候预测 模型显示升高的温度和生长季节降雨的推后。目前的气象模型比较粗糙，不适合安第斯山脉复杂的拓扑结构一 因此需要局地尺度的信息来作决策。本文概述了开发新的，用于增强适应过程的地方知识的过程。这是一个三步 程序，其中包括对当地知识的评估，未来的情形发展，以及参与性研究方法的使用，以确定替代性适应战略。基 于在9个社区330户调查的初步分析表明，北部高原社区比中央高原社区更脆弱。在这两个区域，来自气候的冲击 损失高，但危害的种类所在位置有所不同。当地的气候知识指标的使用在下降，由于缺乏数据点和大量的微气候， 气候预报的降尺度是不可能的。知识共享的参与性测绘和研究是提高适应能力和建立应变能力的至关重要的 流程。本文概述了连接科学基础和当地方法以制定应对战略的重要组成部分即早期预警系统的一种战略。这种 方法结合了科学和当地知识以增强适应能力。关键词：适应，气候变化，知识系统，生计，绘图。

Los sistemas ind´ ıgenas del Altiplano boliviano para lidiar con los riesgos del tiempo y el clima est´ an fallando, o se est´ an perdiendo como resultado de la migraci´ on, el cambio clim´ atico y la integraci´ on de mercado. Las comunidades rurales andinas son particularmente vulnerables a las cambiantes condiciones sociales y amb ientales. Los cambios del clima durante los pasados cuarenta a˜ nos y los modelos de predicci´ on actuales apuntan a un aumento de las temperaturas y llegada tard´ ıa de las lluvias durante la estaci´ on de crecimiento vegetativo. Los actuales modelos meteorol´ ogicos son burdos y no muy apropiados para la compleja topograf´ ıa de los Andes-de tal suerte que se requiere informaci´ on a escala local para

las decisiones. Este art´ ıculo delinea un proceso para desarrollar nuevo conocimiento local que pueda usarse para fortalecer los procesos adaptativos. Se trata de un proceso en tres etapas, que incluye la consideraci´ on de conocimiento local, el desarrollo de escenarios futuros y la utilizaci´ on de m´ etodos de investigaci´ on participativa para identificar estrategias alternativas de adaptaci´ on. Los an´ alisis iniciales basados en un estudio de 330 hogares en nueve comunidades indican que las de la parte norte del Altiplano son m´ as vulnerables que las comunidades de la parte central. En ambas ´ areas las p´ erdidas por calamidad clim´ atica son grandes, pero los tipos de cat´ astrofes var´ ıan seg´ un la localizaci´ on. El uso de indicadores de conocimiento local sobre el clima est´ a declinando y la reducci´ on de la escala para los pron´ osticos del clima es dif´ ıcil que ocurra dada la falta de puntos proveedores de datos y al gran n´ umero de microclimas. La cartograf´ ıa e investigaci´ on participativas, donde el conocimiento se comparte, son procesos que fortalecen la capacidad adaptativa y son cruciales para construir resiliencia. Este art´ ıculo esquematiza una estrategia para ligar los m´ etodos de origen cient´ ıfico con los de los ind´ ıgenas para desarrollar sistemas de alertas tempranas, una parte importante para la incorporaci´ on de estrategias varias. Este enfoque combina el conocimiento de la ciencia con el de los ind´ ıgenas para mejorar la capacidad adaptativa. Palabras clave: adaptaci´ on, cambio clim´ atico, sistemas de conocimiento, medios de vida, mapeo .

S ustainable systems have the capacity to adapt to changing circumstances without undermining their long-term survival. They are resilient to shocks and are able to adapt to changes by reorganizing themselves (Folke et al. 2002). Vulnerable human and biological systems, on the other hand, either lack or are losing the ability to handle these shocks. Technological change could increase the adaptability and resiliency of social and ecological systems faced by the prospect of climate change. Resilience, stated Stadel (2008, 17), can be considered an 'antipode to vulnerability,' a pillar to ecological and social sustainability. This article focuses on issues that arise in adapting to climate change in regions where social, economic, political, and environmental factors threaten this capacity (Bebbington 1999; Rhoades 2008; Stadel 2008). We use examples from the Andean Alitplano to describe a strategy for increasing the adaptive capacity of vulnerable indigenous populations by developing linkages between local, indigenous knowledge systems and scientific ones (United Nations Development Programme 2004; Jett´ e 2005; Meinke et al. 2006; Young and Lipton 2006; Marx et al. 2007).

In this region, climate change is expected to increase temperatures and the frequency of extreme events. Production strategies that used to buffer against climate variability are being lost because of economic, social, and market conditions (Zimmerer 1993). These changes have led to an increase in food insecurity, a reduction in available protein, and increased losses due to drought, frost, disease, and pests.

Diversity and resilience are closely linked in human and in biological systems. The more options available to human populations, the less vulnerable they are to natural disasters or market shifts (Valdivia et al. 2003; Howden et al. 2007). The same is true for natural systems: Diversity enhances the ability of ecosystems to adapt to change (Peterson, Allen, and Holling 1998). 'Increased knowledge is the best way to improve the effectiveness of response' (Committee on Abrupt Climate Change 2002, vi); that is, to reduce vulnerabilities and increase adaptive capabilities.

We address four questions in the context of the northern and central Altiplano of Bolivia:

1. What is the diversity of livelihoods?
2. What is the diversity of perceptions related to climate?
3. What do we know about Andean climate trends and change and its implications?
4. How do knowledge and access to new climate information improve adaptive response?

Participatory processes are implemented to link knowledge systems and to build human, social, and political capitals to strengthen adaptive capacities. Downscaling, by statistical or dynamical methods (Wilby and Wigley 1997), of global climate projections to the spatial detail of this region will require more high-quality climate observations. There is a declining use of traditional knowledge, even where scientific research has validated it. Participatory research allows farmers and scientists to develop a common set of expectations and vocabulary to discuss alternative strategies. By participating in research, farmers can make their own observations and can derive lessons from research beyond those conclusions presented by the researcher. This approach informs development of

early warning systems to identify anticipating actions and address climate risks in four rural communities of a municipality in the northern Altiplano.

## Climate Change, Sustainable Development, and Agriculture

Climate change will increase food insecurity in tropical regions (Brown and Funk 2008; Lobell et al. 2008). Adaptation requires an integrated approach that addresses sources of risk and uses a sustainable development approach (Howden et al. 2007). Adaptation requires an interdisciplinary approach that integrates the knowledge systems of decision makers and the contribution of science.

Agriculture in the Andes is highly sensitive to climate variability and change, especially when climate changes challenge traditional relationships between humans and land (Young and Lipton 2006; Rhoades 2008). Global climate change challenges the adaptive capacity of traditional knowledge that has evolved over centuries (Rhoades 2008; Sperling et al. 2008). Therefore, understanding and managing climate risk is key to developing adaptive capabilities (Howden et al. 2007). Adaptation requires adjusting practices, processes, and capitals in response to current or future climate change (Howdenetal. 2007). Interdisciplinary approaches that involve the decision makers directly affected (Meinke et al. 2006; Marx et al. 2007; Rhoades 2008) are needed in situations where the changes represent major disruptions. Participatory research on adaptation options can help decision makers understand that taking action now is likely to be to their advantage (Howden et al. 2007). These approaches are especially needed where there are market failures and a lack of safety nets. Strategies that build knowledge to anticipate, plan, and strengthen the capacity of rural communities to effect change are key to building resilience and adaptive capacity (O'Brien et al. 2008).

## Frameworks and Methods

Ostrom (2007) provided a diagnostic framework for understanding the drivers of systems that have interactions across multiple scales. Our focus is on how the relationship among livelihoods, strategies, capitals, and knowledge affects responses to the uncertainties of climate change at a local scale (Liverman, Yarnal, and Turner 2002; Young and Lipton 2006). Our research operates at multiple scales and uses multiple methods. The livelihood strategies of small farmers in peasant communities in the northern and central Altiplano, who operate in complex systems and require flexibility in management of their weather and markets, are analyzed (Collinson 2001). Climate trends for the past thirty to forty years in the entire Bolivian Altiplano are also analyzed. An analysis of the implications of regional climate change projections for current knowledge systems provides a context for future decisions. Participatory research processes are employed as a tool for integrating knowledge systems by mapping perceptions of hazards, and change, at a watershed and landscape level and are used to document changes in production systems and in local knowledge. Participatory research also concentrates on developing adaptive capacities.

## Sustainable Livelihoods and Livelihood Strategies

Ecosystem resilience describes the capacity to adjust to disturbances, without shifting to a qualitatively different state, by absorbing shocks while maintaining function and adapting to change (Folke et al. 2002). Livelihood resilience depends on the capabilities and capacities of people to adapt to internal and external shocks and stresses (Chambers and Conway 1991). A livelihood encompasses the income-generating activities pursued by a household and its individuals that result from commanding human, natural, financial, social, cultural, and physical capitals (Bebbington 1999; Valdivia and Gilles 2001), which are claimed, accessed, or controlled through networks and institutions (de Haan 2000, 345-46; Pretty and Ward 2001). Capabilities (Chambers and Conway 1991) directly impact the ability to cope. Sustainable livelihoods (SLs) connect livelihood and ecosystem resiliency (Chambers and Conway 1991; Bebbington 1999), through the capability of individuals to build their capitals (Valdivia 2004). The strategies developed might be agriculturally based or could be rural strategies (Bebbington 1999), where farmers articulate with markets (Mayer 2002). Resilient livelihoods depend on the outcome of the 'hinge' among individuals, their families, and communities and the structures in which they negotiate (de Haan 2000; Valdivia and Gilles 2001). Building human, social, and political capitals in rural communities are key elements of this hinge. Research has documented a great diversity in the ability of individuals and communities in Latin America to access resources, to control them, and to act on information (Bebbington 2000; Eakin 2000; Podest´ a

et al. 2000; Valdivia et al. 2003; Rhoades 2008; Sperling et al. 2008; Yager, Resnikowski, and Halloy 2008).

## Knowledge Systems

Scientists and agricultural producers rely on different knowledge systems to guide their decisions. Although both knowledge systems are empirical, they differ significantly in their focus and orientation. Networks for communicating forecast information in the Altiplano are local and do not utilize scientific forecasts. Networks that communicate scientific forecasts do not include farmers (Gilles and Valdivia 2009). Farmers base their production decisions on local knowledge systems, developed from years of observations, experiences, and experiments, which provide the basis for making forecasts and a set of behavioral rules followed in response to these forecasts (Gilles and Valdivia 2009).

Scientific knowledge focuses on relationships and phenomena that do not vary across time and space, whereas local knowledge is very context specific. Scientific knowledge is reductionist and looks at relationships among individual variables, whereas local knowledge is holistic and focuses on cases rather than on variables (Kloppenburg 1991). Because the knowledge systems of agricultural practitioners and scientists have different foci, teaching farmers scientific principles will not lead to technological change. If agricultural research is to contribute to the well-being of agricultural producers and their communities, bridges must be created between these two knowledge systems. These bridges assure that scientific research is conducted in priority areas for producers and ensure that research results can be used to improve their livelihoods. The traditional model of technological transfer assumes that once farmers understand the science, they can build these bridges. This model has not had great success with agricultural producers; for example, merely reporting climate data to farmers will not lead to adaptation (Ziervogel 2004; Patt and Schroter 2008). One of the principal responses to the weaknesses of the technology transfer model has been the development of participatory research approaches where farmers and researchers work together to bridge knowledge systems (Chambers and Ghildyal 1985; Collinson 2001). Here participation is viewed both as a means for achieving a purpose and as an end in itself (Hayward, Simpson, and Wood 2004). Participatory research involves scientists and farmers conducting research together but evaluating the results using their own criteria. The colearning that takes place can help the researcher develop technologies that are both appropriate to the needs of farmers and attractive to them. In addition, the process also helps farmers understand the nature of agronomic research and makes them better consumers of these products.

Participatory research can take a number of forms and stages (Hayward, Simpson, and Wood 2004). A rudimentary form is where farmers present their knowledge of climate change and its impacts to scientists and technicians and they in turn provide community members with summaries of results from existing weather stations and climate models. A second form of participatory research is where farmers and scientists conduct experiments together. Research on the ability of soil amendments to increase water retention was conducted in this manner in the region. A third type of research is scientists trying to validate existing local knowledge of climate prediction methods and then incorporating these techniques into an early warning system for producers. The participatory research maps of hazards and their change developed with farmers and the findings on climate trends are shared using the first approach.

## Risk Perceptions and Decisions

For knowledge on forecasts to be useful for coping strategies, it must be skillful, timely, and relevant to potential users; expressed in the language of the potential user; and from a trusted source (Stern and Easterling 1999; Finan and Nelson 2001). Even then, economic and structural constraints might preclude producers from using these forecasts (Eakin 2000; Agrawala and Broad 2002).

Because forecasts are not inherently deterministic, the way people process uncertainty should be taken into account to facilitate communication systems that contribute to adaptive capacity. Marx et al. (2007) argued that sharing experiences is important because people process information relying on experiential systems.

Two-way participatory communication can enhance trust between knowledge systems (Wilkins 2001). People assess risks using rules-based systems and association-based systems (Slovic and Weber 2002). When the results of associational and rules-based systems conflict, it is more likely that people would assess risk based on the former. In the case of the Altiplano, this will probably mean that if the results of traditional and expert forecasts conflict, farmers will use the traditional assessment model, unless expert forecasts can be incorporated into local knowledge systems (Slovic and Weber 2002).

Altiplano farmers perceive that the climate is changing (Gonzales, Cusicanqui, and Aparicio 2005) and we use farmers' perceptions of climate change as a starting hypothesis for this multilevel, multidisciplinary study.

## Findings

Improving the capacity of Andean farmers to adapt to climate change is a three-stage activity. First, farmers and researchers need to develop a set of understandings about changes in climate and production systems over recent decades. Three research activities were conducted to accomplish this. A survey of 330 households was undertaken in the northern and central Altiplano to identify livelihood strategies and constraints facing local households. At the same time, meteorological data from existing weather stations in the Altiplano were gathered and analyzed to estimate trends over the past three to four decades. Finally, participatory research was carried out in our study communities to identify perceptions of climate change, to map weather-related hazards, and to identify indicators that might be used in early warning systems.

Second, we need to learn how climate change might impact agriculture in the future. A research activity focused on the projections of future climate change for this region using existing global climate change models. Finally, this information must be returned to the community to identify mitigation and adaptation strategies.

## The Livelihood Strategies, Capitals, and Perceptions of Risks in the Northern and Central Altiplano

A sustainable livelihoods framework of capitals and capabilities (Chambers and Conway 1991; Bebbington 1999; Valdivia and Gilles 2001) and a household economic portfolio approach (Valdivia, Dunn, and Jett´ e 1996; Valdivia 2004) inform our household survey. Diversification of activities might reduce the impact of climate variability with activities and technologies that reduce covariant risk. Farmers manage risk ex ante by diversifying the portfolio of economic activities that smooth income through the year (Valdivia 2004). Coping strategies occur after a shock and include liquidating assets, temporarily migrating, relying on remittances, pulling children out of school, or reducing consumption of food (Valdivia 2004). Markets (seed, credit, food) are unreliable, and nonmarket relations are important in accessing labor, land, food, and animals. Interviews in Spanish and Aymara were conducted in 2006 with 330 households. The capitals and activities (Table 1), shocks experienced and coping strategies (Table 2), and perceptions of the impact of climate hazards on wellbeing (Table 3) of rural communities in the northern and central Altiplano are presented by community. Analysis of variance is performed to determine differences in the mean values among communities, and significant differences are indicated.

Human capital (Table 1) in communities of the central Altiplano is higher than in the northern Altiplano. These communities also plow more land (natural capital), have more fallow area, and manage a larger number of potato varieties. In the northern Altiplano, land size is smaller, and a higher diversity of crops is planted. Differences in social capital, such as networks to access credit (local vs. institutions), exist. San Jose (a canton, or political unit, including five communities) and San Juan have access to institutions for credit through their engagement in dairy markets. Other communities rely on local networks, with higher probability of facing similar climate risks. Local knowledge about climate forecasts is the main source of information (Gilles and Valdivia 2009) in all communities. In the northern Altiplano communities, the radio is a common source of information. Economic capital, stored in livestock and sheep, is greater in the central Altiplano communities, which implies a greater level of accumulation and ability to cope with shocks. Central Altiplano communities possess larger amounts of buffer stocks, chu˜ no (freezedried potatoes that depend on cold winter nights to be processed), which is essential for food security. Income from agriculture and total income are higher in the central Altiplano communities studied. Northern Altiplano communities have a higher proportion from off-farm activities, related to smaller average land size. Farmers in this region in recent years gradually introduced new cash crops, such as onions and peas, and more recently potato varieties that can be grown with warmer temperatures, farming intensively.

Perceptions of threats to family well-being, elicited through the same household interviews (Table 3), used rankings from 1 ( not a threat ) to 5 ( extreme threat ). Threats included climate hazards and change, market risks, and environmental stressors (pests and a changing climate). Impacts of frost, a changing climate, and pests are a very strong threat in northern Altiplano communities, whereas floods and frost are very strong threats in the central Altiplano. The communities with lower total income have greater concerns about adult unemployment and low prices of livestock, both important sources of income in this region. Ancoraimes communities have a higher vulnerability to shocks. With farmers

Table 1. Capitals, coping strategies, and income sources in rural communities of the central and northern Altiplano of Bolivia in 2006

| Significance   | * ns p < 0.07                                                                                             | * * * * * *                                                      | p < 0.057                    | * * *                                                                    | p < 0.018                                       | * *                                 | * *                                                                                                 | * * * 0.037 ns                                                                                   |
|----------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Kellhuiri      | 25 5.20 52.44 3.16                                                                                        | 1.172 4.766 0.474 2.167 4.36 2.8                                 | 16                           | 0 100 0                                                                  | 52.00 13/25                                     | 4.23 51.71                          | 29.416 0 6                                                                                          | 15,624 8,637 5,846 890 3,960                                                                     |
| Vinto Coopani  | 29 4.38 50.41 3.84                                                                                        | 0.853 3.960 0.796 0.612 3.83 2.68                                | 24                           | 29 71 7                                                                  | 34.48 10/29                                     | 3.66 27.16                          | 15.423 4 20                                                                                         | 10,582 5,937 2,978 485 4,447                                                                     |
| San Juan       | 31 5.32 48.61 3.32                                                                                        | 2.550 7.370 2.112 3.812 3.16 2.74                                | 16                           | 100 0 0                                                                  | 51.61 16/31                                     | 8.70 35.20                          | 19.814 0 11                                                                                         | 22,880 13,449 11,742 421 4,645                                                                   |
| San Jose       | 96 7.13 49.33 3.86                                                                                        | 1.835 3.955 2.105 2.272 3.79 2.76                                | 29                           | 79 21 7                                                                  | 59.46                                           | 8.16 34.14                          | 23.898 9 17                                                                                         | 24,029 14,310 12,020 724 3,372                                                                   |
| Chojna-pata    | 27 4.50 50.04 2.86                                                                                        | 0.286 0.703 0 0.250 2.67 3.74                                    | 30                           | 37 63 7                                                                  | 55.56                                           | 3.47 42.79                          | 4.720 73 19                                                                                         | 5,910 4,077 2,649 808 1,692                                                                      |
| Calahuan-cane  | 23 4.82 45.64 4.43                                                                                        | 0.171 0.391 0.106 0.224 2.52 4.43                                | 17                           | 50 50 35                                                                 | 65.22                                           | 2.00 19.36                          | 2.894 74 26                                                                                         | 6,768 5,305 2,248 467 3,517                                                                      |
| Cohani         | 27 3.44 44.48 3.09                                                                                        | 0.091 0.222 0.002 0.647 1.59 3.96                                | 26                           | 29 71 15                                                                 | 62.96                                           | 1.27 11.15                          | 1.883 63 37                                                                                         | 2,416 1,774 497 121 1,633                                                                        |
| Karkapa-ta     | 15 4.33 48.07 3.68                                                                                        | 0.147 1.000 0.047 3.470 1.87 4.53                                | 60                           | 0 100 15                                                                 | 26.67                                           | 2.01 16.71                          | 3.222 87 67                                                                                         | 3,760 2,659 998 148 2,515                                                                        |
| Chichaya       | 57 7.07 49.26 3.53                                                                                        | 0.390 1.636 0.182 0.644 1.88 5.84                                | 16                           | 18 82 35                                                                 | 31.58                                           | 3.7 14.69                           | 5.054 82 21                                                                                         | 10,171 8,700 6,770 379 4,016                                                                     |
|                | capital head of household (years) head of household (years) household labor (adult equivalent)            | (Has) 2006-2007 (Has) (Has) potato (# of varieties) (# of crops) | credit last five years (% of | institutions (%) family, friends (%) to information radio (% households) | of biophysical indicators for households)       | capital                             | Chu˜ no ( arroba = 11 kg) sale crop failure (% households) from friends when crops fail households) | sources income: Cash and in kind (Bs) cash income (Bs) ag cash (Bs) (Bs) from migrant labor (Bs) |
| Variables      | Number of households Human Education, Age, Total Natural capital Plowed fields Fallow field Alfalfa (Has) | Grasslands Diversity Crops diversity                             | Social capital Access to     | households) Credit from Credit from Access                               | Cultural capital Local knowledge agriculture (% | Economic Cattle (head) Sheep (head) | Coping strategies Food buffer Livestock Borrow (%                                                   | Income Total Total Income Remittances Income                                                     |

Table 2. Perceptions of risks to household well-being of various climate and market hazards in rural communities of the central and northern Altiplano of

Bolivia (2006)

| Significance   |                   | *                                     | *                | *                 | *                              | < 0.016                    | p *             | p < 0.072                      | *                           |
|----------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------|------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------------|-----------------------------|
| Kellhuiri      | 25                | 4.32                                  | 4.28             | 3.00              | 4.32                           | 3.80                       | 3.88            | 4.07                           | 3.24                        |
| Vinto Coopani  | 29                | 4.24                                  | 3.76             | 3.00              | 4.66                           | 3.29                       | 3.48            | 4.13                           | 2.76                        |
| San Juan       | 31                | 3.77                                  | 4.23             | 2.90              | 4.52                           | 3.81                       | 3.06            | 3.80                           | 2.46                        |
| San Jose       | 94                | 3.88                                  | 4.48             | 2.98              | 4.29                           | 3.90                       | 3.16            | 3.69                           | 2.29                        |
| Chojnapata     | 27                | 3.56                                  | 3.85             | 2.67              | 3.59                           | 4.11                       | 3.78            | 3.78                           | 4.04                        |
| Calahuancane   | 23                | 4.09                                  | 3.91             | 3.00              | 4.26                           | 4.22                       | 4.17            | 3.96                           | 4.30                        |
| Cohani         | 27                | 3.96                                  | 3.89             | 2.96              | 3.93                           | 4.26                       | 4.04            | 3.78                           | 4.17                        |
| Karkapata      | 15                | 3.80                                  | 3.53             | 2.93              | 4.00                           | 3.93                       | 4.13            | 4.20                           | 4.20                        |
| Chichaya       | 56                | 3.51                                  | 3.96             | 2.41              | 3.89                           | 3.79                       | 3.68            | 3.84                           | 3.70                        |
| Type of threat | No. of households | Hail impacting on crops and livestock | Impact of floods | Impact of drought | Impact of frost on agriculture | Impact of changing climate | Impact of pests | Impact of low livestock prices | Impact of an adult becoming |

Table 3. Losses experienced in the last year in rural communities of the central and northern Altiplano of Bolivia (2006)

| Significance   | *                           |            | *          | ns         | ns            | ns          | *             | ns                  | ns                 | ns                 |
|----------------|-----------------------------|------------|------------|------------|---------------|-------------|---------------|---------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Kellhuiri      | 25 92                       |            | 10         | 11.50      | 0             | 20          | 9.44          | 33                  | 9.55               | 19.88              |
| Vinto Coopani  | 29 89.66                    |            | 20.59      | 0          | 0             | 22.20       | 12.63         | 0                   | 0                  | 11.81              |
| San Juan       | 31 70.97                    |            | 21.87      | 12.43      | 0             | 40          | 9.61          | 14.55               | 0                  | 20.61              |
| San Jose       | 94 97.33                    |            | 28.74      | 30.13      | 21.91         | 16.02       | 12.33         | 17.18               | 11.16              | 17.06              |
| Chojnapata     | 27 0                        |            | 0          | 28.33      | 25.35         | 20.45       | 22.38         | 0                   | 16.85              | 17.61              |
| Calahuancane   | 23 0                        |            | 0          | 0          | 20.52         | 20          | 28.18         | 0                   | 5                  | 16.37              |
| Cohani         | 27 0                        |            | 30         | 0          | 18.72         | 21.87       | 36.48         | 0                   | 15                 | 17.85              |
| Karkapata      | 15 0                        |            | 17.50      | 0          | 18.33         | 20          | 27.66         | 0                   | 13.55              | 19.15              |
| Chichaya       | 56 0                        |            | 40         | 21         | 18.52         | 16.5        | 27.73         | 15                  | 11.32              | 14.63              |
| n              | 160                         |            | 34         | 50         | 107           | 48          | 278           | 13                  | 40                 | 164                |
|                | in agriculture %of          |            | to drought | to floods  | due to frosts | due to hail | to crop pests | to low prices crops | frost on livestock | livestock diseases |
|                | households Important losses |            | due        | losses due | losses        | losses      | losses due    | losses due          | losses             | losses             |
| Shocks         | of                          | households | losses     |            |               |             |               |                     |                    |                    |
|                | No.                         |            | %of        | %of        | %of           | %of         | %of           | %of                 | %of                | %of                |

wedevelop landscape analysis, participatory mapping of vulnerabilities analysis, and an example of a knowledge system for early warning in this region.

## Climate Trends in the Altiplano

To analyze trends in temperature and precipitation weneededtoobtain a long-term homogenous data set of monthly maximum and minimum temperatures (Tmax and Tmin) and daily precipitation (PP). To meet the criteria of homogeneity, only stations with less than 10 percent missing data could be included (Garc´ ıa et al. 2007). Most data were not available in digital form and had to be transcribed from individual station records. Fourteen stations representing a subset of all Bolivian Altiplano stations had sufficient data to analyze trends in surface Tmax, Tmin, and PP. The stations had time series of varying lengths with the longest being 1950 through 2004 and the shortest being 1960 through 2004.

The temperature data were used to calculate reference evapotranspiration (ETo) with the PenmanMonteith method using the guidelines for estimating missing data (Garc´ ıa et al. 2004). Finally the evapotranspiration deficit (ETo-PP) and its trend were calculated. Trends were analyzed using the Mann-Kendall test. Data from stations with statistical significance were plotted in a geographic information system (GIS) environment. Both ordinary kriging with and without the incorporation of anisotropy were used to interpolate point results. The lag-dependence (position independence) of the variances of the point results is represented in the semi-variogram (SV). To yield a sound interpolation for each climatic indicator, a suitable kriging model (ordinary or ordinary anisotropic), a good lag distance, and a good distribution for the semi-variogram (e.g., Gaussian, exponential) were selected using a trialand-error procedure. Finally, the observed maps are linked to qualitative results coming from surveys conducted in several rural communities in the area.

Figure 1 presents the differences in the annual mean temperatures and precipitation before and after 1983. The results show that trends in Tmax and Tmin represent some warming over the last fifty years. However, the temporal and spatial structure of these trends varies. Significant cooling trends in Tmin are found in the southern Altiplano (Figure 1A), whereas significant warming is identified in the central and northern Altiplano. In contrast, Tmax trends show a more homogeneous pattern of warming, although with less significance (Figure 1B). Precipitation presents a ho- mogeneous pattern of no change, with only one station (Copacabana) showing significant trends (Figure 1C).

The increasing Tmax is related to increases in reference evapotranspiration in the region (Figure 2). The impacts are larger in the southern and northern Altiplano and less significant in the central region. The cooling trends in Tmin in the southern Altiplano might be due to the reported advance of nonsustainable agricultural activities like quinoa production. These trends are not observed in the central and northern areas where land management has not changed. This might be reducing air humidity, thus permitting increased radiative cooling at night. This drying could be causing a local cooling trend that is not yet overcome by trends in global warming. The overall warming trend in Tmaxmightberelatedtobothgreenhouse warming and desertification (drying and cooling) effects, especially in the south. The results suggest regime changes in temperature and precipitation trends that could be due to a combination of large-scale forcing and local disturbances.

## Projections of Climate Change for the Altiplano

Accurate climate projections for the Altiplano will require high-resolution scenarios because of the region's complex topography. At present the trade-off is between a sufficient range of model results to characterize uncertainties and high-resolution results. In this initial research we opt for a sufficient range of models to characterize future climate.

Theglobal climate models employed in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report (AR4; Solomon and Qin 2007) have been analyzed using the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP3) data set (Meehl et al. 2007). The models are employing horizontal grid resolutions that vary from near 100 km to more than 400 km. The medium and higher resolutions of these models do represent an elevated plateau in this central Andean region and provide a rough starting point for this evaluation. Analysis of the present-day annual cycle of temperature and precipitation simulated by the models shows that the models capture the timing of the rainy season onset and termination and the dry season. They also capture the weaker annual cycle observed in monthly temperatures. However, compared with observations, the models have a small warm bias and a wet bias, with too much moisture transport from the Amazon (Thibeault, Seth, and Garc´ ıa 2010).

Figure 1. Differences in the mean of the records before and after 1983 in (A) Tmin, (B) Tmax, and (C) precipitation.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Trends in evapotranspiration deficit (ETo-PP) in the study area for the complete stations records.

<!-- image -->

Analysis of twenty-first-century projections shows agreement among the models that mean temperature increases of 1.5 ◦ C are likely by 2030 and greater than 4 ◦ C (5-6 SD s) through the annual cycle by the end of the century. Expected precipitation changes are negligible when averaged over all seasons. Our analysis suggests, however, that the early rainy season (SeptemberNovember)islikely to be drier and the peak rainy season (January-March) is likely to be wetter, implying a shift toward a later and stronger rainy season (Thibeault, Seth, and Garc´ ıa 2010), consistent with a larger scale analysis (Seth, Rojas, and Rauscher 2010).

Because changes in mean climate can have a large effect on the distribution of extremes, we also examine indexes of temperature and precipitation extremes in the scenarios. Temperature-related extremes show strong trends in increasing warm nights and heat wave duration, fewer frost days, and a larger extreme temperature variability (Thibeault, Seth, and Garc´ ıa 2010). Precipitation extremes are projected to increase both in heavy rainfall events and in dry spells. These signals are seen in the observed records at Patacamaya, although the dry spell signal is not statistically significant (Thibeault, Seth, and Garc´ ıa 2010).

These changes are different from present conditions, with increased variability and shifts in timing of the rains, in a context of rain-fed agriculture. Climate model projections also project that soil moisture is likely to be substantially reduced throughout the year, stressing the need for processes that build adaptive capacity of farmers, who will make decisions in very different conditions (Thibeault, Seth, and Wang forthcoming).

## Participatory Research, Perceptions of Climate Change, and Hazard Mapping

Workshops were carried out in each study community to identify perceived changes in climate and in production systems and to develop local hazard maps. Farmer perceptions of temperature changes and frost frequencies were quite similar to the results obtained from the analysis of regional station data. Perceptions of changes in precipitation were quite different from the results of the analysis of station data. Farmers felt that there was a trend toward less rain, especially in the early part of the agricultural year. Further analysis and discussions with community members suggest that local perceptions might be related to the increasing atmospheric water demand due to higher temperatures and larger thermal amplitude. As a result, soils are drier and the first rains no longer provide enough water for early planting and consequently precipitation levels are perceived to be less. However, a spring drying trend (not yet significant) is seen in the station data (Seth, Rojas, and Rauscher 2010).

In addition to identifying perceptions, vulnerability maps were developed for all participating communities. The following example is from the northern Altiplano research site, the Huanquisco microbasin (Figure 3) located between 15 ◦ 45 ′ 34.91 ′′ and 15 ◦ 56 ′ 15.29 ′′ latitude and 68 ◦ 54 ′ 00.66 ′′ and 68 ◦ 45 ′ 02.51 ′′ longitude. The approximate area is 125.14 km 2 . The communities studied represent an altitudinal gradient: Choj˜ napata is located at the highest level in this watershed, at 4,400 to 4,550 mabove sea level; Cohani and Calahuancane are in the middle of this watershed, and Chinchaya is at 3,840 m above sea level, by Lake Titikaka. Community participatory workshops were conducted to learn about the changes in production systems and land use, to identify sources of risks, and to construct maps of the past and present situations. Vulnerability maps were developed through workshops organized with a community official from each participating rural community (Figure 3 and Figure 4), for each of the four communities. The borders of each community were geo-referenced. Par- ticipants identified on maps the zones where climate hazards are experienced. The hazards identified include hail, frost, snow, and droughts. Both perceptions of the past, defined by farmers as the time when things were different, and of the present were drawn and transferred to two maps (see Figure 3 and Figure 4). As the maps depict, at higher elevations there is a change from hail to snow, associated with more frost events in the present. The middle of the watershed also witnessed a shift from hail to snow and frosts, but there is also the appearance of drought events that especially impact crop production. Finally, the lowest part of the watershed, Chinchaya, saw a shift from drought events to damaging frosts near Lake Titicaca. These findings are consistent with those found through the household survey (Table 3).

## Early Warning System: An Example of Linking Knowledge Systems to Develop Adaptive Capacity by Anticipating Weather Changes

The development of early warning systems is a priority for international and national disaster relief agencies, For example, early warning systems have been developed for floods, droughts, and tsunamis (Basher 2006). Most of these systems operate at the regional level and their focus is to provide information to government or corporate decision makers. The elements of the system include risk knowledge, monitoring and warning, dissemination and communication, and the capacity to take appropriate action (Basher 2006). The system described here operates at the community level and is based primarily on locally generated data complemented by forecast information where available.

We describe the methodology used to develop early warning systems in a situation where there is insufficient meteorological data and a multitude of microclimates created by the region's topography. The first step is to identify and validate local indicators to see what role they can play in a system incorporating local and scientific knowledge. After community discussions, groups of four individuals were chosen to work on the topic of weather risks. They were chosen because of their interest in climate prediction and mitigation rather than because of their expertise. These groups contained people with varying levels of knowledge about climate forecasting and included members from all four communities in the watershed.

The first task of each group was to interview community elders to get a list of local climate indicators

<!-- image -->

and to understand how they were used. Once this list was assembled, group members went into the field to observe the indicators themselves. Based on their indicators, each of the group participants made his or her own forecasts for his or her farms and communities. As groups, they created matrices of the indicators, the observations, and their predictions. We now have two years of data and the results of this work will be presented to the communities. The data to date show that the indicators related to time of planting appear to have a high correlation with crop yields.

Group members, community members, and project agronomists discussed various mitigation and adapta-

Figure 3. Map of the Ancoraimes watershed depicting present-day vulnerabilities in four rural communities. Red = hail; blue = frost; purple = snow; orange = drought.

tion strategies to be tried. Some intended to reduce the effects of hazards, others to shift to alternative practices. Strategies currently under consideration include changing planting times and locations and the use of foliar fertilizers to enhance recovery from frost. This is the first component of the early warning system based on a seasonal forecast. The next phase of the early warning system will focus on strategies for reducing potential damage from frost and hail. This includes preparation for the use of smoke and other techniques for reducing frost damage and using linkages with national forecast agencies and small weather stations to indicate when these techniques should be used.

Figure 4. Map of the Ancoraimes watershed depicting past vulnerabilities in four rural communities. Red = hail; blue = frost; purple = snow; orange = drought.

## Analysis and Conclusions

In the Altiplano of Bolivia, warming, later onset of the rainy season, and the presentation of more extreme weather undermine the production strategies that farmers have used to deal with weather-related risk. Local forecast techniques are falling into disuse and some are no longer working as they once did. In addition, the behavior of certain indicator species has changed due to climate and environmental changes. So as climate is changing, the ability to respond to climate-related risks is declining. The later onset of the rains is reducing food

<!-- image -->

security by reducing the options that farmers have for planting dates and by threatening the production of two of the most important sources of dietary plant protein (quinoa and fava beans).

This project outlines a participatory methodology for linking the climate and weather forecasting communities with small farmers in indigenous communities. This increased understanding of the situation faced by producers permits the development of new production strategies. The interaction between researchers and local communities has generated a number of possible strategies that might mitigate the disruption caused

by these changes. These opportunities include the introduction of new crops and the identification of varieties that will be more adapted to future conditions and require an iterative and long-term process of collaboration.

## Can Information Improve Adaptive Capacity?

Researchers have found institutional, economic, and political constraints to the use of climate forecasts (Eakin 2000; Agrawala and Broad 2002). Better forecast information alone might not address vulnerability. Often those who benefit are those best placed to take advantage of knowledge and not necessarily the most vulnerable (Adger 2006). Information, with alternatives provided to vulnerable farmers, allows them to decide how to adjust (Valdivia et al. 2003; Patt, Suarez, and Gwata 2005). In this case, participatory approaches that incorporate the knowledge of trends, projections of climate change with implications for the Altiplano agriculture, and local knowledge of forecasts and the participatory research activities are all elements in developing adaptive capacity. Introducing an early warning system, developed through participatory processes, improves the ability to prepare for these events. Our focus on adaptive capacity to climate change does not negate our acknowledgment that economic, cultural, political, and social factors play key roles in livelihood strategies and outcomes, on well-being and the environment (Stadel 2008). The processes explored in the context of climate change are processes that in themselves provide opportunities to strengthen capabilities of a community to address its issues (Hayward, Simpson, and Wood 2004).

## Acknowledgments

This publication was made possible by the U.S. Agency for International Development and the generous support of the American People for the Sustainable Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Collaborative Research Support Program (SANREM CRSP) under terms of Cooperative Agreement No. EPP-A-00-04-00013-00 to the Office of International Research and Development at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Adapting to Change in the Andean Highlands: Practices and Strategies to Address Climate and Market Risks in Vulnerable Agroecosystems is a research project of the SANREM CRSP award to the University of Missouri and collaborating institutions. We are thankful to the people of the eleven collaborating rural communities and the teams of researchers and students in Bolivia, Peru, and the United States who made this research possible.

## References

- Adger, W. N. 2006. Vulnerability. Global Environmental Change 16:268-81.
- Agrawala, S., and K. Broad. 2002. Technology transfer perspectives on climate forecast applications. Research in Science and Technology Studies 13:45-69.
- Basher, R. 2006. Global early warning systems for natural hazards: Systematic and people centred. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 364:216782.
- Bebbington, A. 1999. Capitals and capabilities: A framework for analyzing peasant viability, rural livelihoods and poverty. World Development 27 (12): 2021-44.
- ---. 2000. Reencountering development: Livelihood transitions and place transformations in the Andes. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 90 (3): 495.
- Brown, M. E., and C. C. Funk. 2008. Food security under climate change. Science 319:580-81.
- Chambers, R., and G. R. Conway. 1991. Sustainable rural livelihoods: Practical concepts for the 21st century. Discussion Paper 296, Institute of Development Studies, London.
- Chambers, R., and B. P. Ghildyal. 1985. Agricultural research for resource poor farmers: The farmer first-and last model. Agricultural Research and Extension 20:1-20.
- Collinson, M. 2001. Institutional and professional obstacles to a more effective research process for small holder agriculture. Agricultural Systems 69 (1-2): 27-36.
- Committee on Abrupt Climate Change. 2002. Abrupt climate change: Inevitable surprises. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
- de Haan, L. J. 2000. Globalization, localization and sustainable livelihood. Sociologia Ruralis 40 (3): 339-65.
- Eakin, H. 2000. Smallholder maize production and climatic risk: A case study from Mexico. Climatic Change 45:1936.
- Finan, T., and D. Nelson. 2001. Making rain, making roads, making do: Public and private adaptations to drought in Cear´ a, Northeast Brazil. Climate Research 19:97108.
- Folke, C., S. Carpenter, T. Elmqvist, L. Gunderson, C. S. Holling, and B. Walker. 2002. Resilience and sustainable development: Building adaptive capacity in a world of transformations. Ambio 31 (5): 437-40.
- Garc´ ıa, M., D. Raes, R. Allen, and C. Herbas. 2004. Dynamics of reference evapotranspiration in the Bolivian highlands (Altiplano). Agricultural and Forest Meteorology 125:67-82.
- Garc´ ıa, M., D. Raes, S. E. Jacobsen, and T. Michel. 2007. Agroclimatic constraints for rainfed agriculture in the Bolivian Altiplano. Journal of Arid Environments 71:10921.
- Gilles, J., and C. Valdivia. 2009. Local forecast communication in the Altiplano . Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society (BAMS) 90:85-91.

- Gonzales, J., J. Cusicanqui, and M. Aparicio. 2005. Vulnerabilidad y adaptaci´ on al cambio clim´ atico en las regiones del lago Tititcaca y los Valles Cruce˜ nos de Bolivia (Vulnerability and adaptation to climate change in the regions of Lake Titicaca and the Cruce˜ no Valleys of Bolivia). La Paz, Bolivia: Ministry of Development Planning, Programa Nacional de Cambios Clim´ aticos Bolivia (Bolivian National Program on Climate Change).
- Hayward, C., L. Simpson, and L. Wood. 2004. Still left out in the cold: Problematizing participatory research and development . Sociologia Ruralis 44 (1): 95-108.
- Howden, S. M., J. Soussana, F. N. Tubiello, N. Chhetri, and M. Dunlop. 2007. Adapting agriculture to climate change. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106 (50): 19691-696.
- Jett´ e, C. 2005. Democratic decentralization and poverty reduction: The Bolivian case. Oslo, Norway: United Nations Development Programme, Oslo Governance Centre.
- Kloppenburg, J. 1991. Social theory and the deconstruction of agricultural science: Local knowledge for an alternative agriculture. Rural Sociology 56 (4): 519-48.
- Liverman, D., B. Yarnal, and B. L. Turner II. 2002. The human dimensions of global change. In Geography in America at the dawn of the 21st century, ed. G. L. Gaile and C. J. Willmott, 267-82. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Lobell, D. B., M. B. Burke, C. Tebaldi, M. D. Mastrandrea, W. P. Falcon, and R. L. Naylor. 2008. Prioritizing climate change adaptation needs for food security in 2030. Science 319:607-10.
- Marx, S. M., E. U. Weber, B. S. Orlove, A. Leiserowitz, D. H. Krantz, C. Rocoli, and J. Phillips. 2007. Communication and mental processes: Experiential and analytic processing of uncertain climate information. Global Environmental Change 17:47-58.
- Mayer, E. 2002. The articulated peasant: Household economies in the Andes. Oxford, UK: Westview Press.
- Meehl, G. A., C. Covey, T. Delworth, M. Latif, B. McAvaney, J. F. B. Mitchell, R. J. Stouffer, and K. E. Taylor. 2007. The WCRP CMIP3 multimodel dataset: A new era in climate change research. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 88:1383-94.
- Meinke, H., R. Nelson, P. Kokic, R. Stone, R. Sevaraju, and W. Baethgen. 2006. Actionable climate knowledge: From analysis to synthesis. Climate Research 33 (December): 101-10.
- O'Brien, G., P. O'Keefe, H. Meena, J. Rose, and L. Wilson. 2008. Climate adaptation from a poverty perspective. Climate Policy 8:194-201.
- Ostrom, E. 2007. A diagnostic approach for going beyond panaceas . PNAS 104 (39): 15181-87.
- Patt, A. P., and D. Schroter. 2008. Perceptions of climate risk in Mozambique: Implications for the success of adaptation strategies. Global Environmental Change 18:458-67.
- Patt, A., P. Suarez, and C. Gwata. 2005. Effects of seasonal climate forecasts and participatory workshops among subsistence farmers in Zimbabwe. Proceedings of the National Academy of the Sciences 103 (35): 12623-28.
- Peterson, G., C. R. Allen, and C. S. Holling. 1998. Ecological resilience, biodiversity and scale. Ecosystems 1 (1): 6-18.
- Podest´ a, G., D. Letson, J. Jones, C. Mesian, F. Royce, A. Ferreyra, J. O'Brien, D. Legler, and J. Hansen. 2000.
- Experiences in application of ENSO-related climate information in the agricultural sector of Argentina. In Proceedings of the International Forum on Climate Prediction, Agriculture and Development, 217-21. Palisades, NY: International Research Institute for Climate Prediction.
- Pretty, J., and H. Ward. 2001. Social capital and the environment. World Development 29 (2): 209-27.
- Rhoades, R. 2008. Disappearance of the glacier on Mama Cotacachi: Ethnological research and climate change in the Ecuadorian Andes. Pirineos 163:37-50.
- Seth, A., M. Rojas, and S. A. Rauscher. 2010. CMIP3 projected changes in the annual cycle of the South American Monsoon. Climatic Change 98:331-57.
- Slovic, P., and E. U. Weber. 2002. Perception of risk posed by extreme events. Paper presented at Risk Management Strategies in an Uncertain World Conference, Palisades, NY, 12-13 April.
- Solomon, S., and D. Qin. 2007. Climate change 2007: The physical science basis. Working Group I report to the Fourth Assessment of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. New York: Cambridge University Press.
- Sperling, F., C. Valdivia, R. Quiroz, R. Valdivia, L. Angulo, A. Seimon, and I. Noble. 2008. Transitioning to climate resilient development-Perspectives from communities of Peru. Climate Change Series No. 115: The World Bank Environment Department Papers, Washington, DC.
- Stadel, C. 2008. Resilience and adaptations of rural communities and agricultural land use in the tropical Andes: Coping with environmental and socioeconomic changes. Pirineos 163:15-36.
- Stern, P. C., and W. E. Easterling, eds. 1999. Making climate forecasts matter. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
- Thibeault, J., A. Seth, and M. Garcia. 2010. Changing climate in the Bolivian Altiplano: CMIP3 projections for extremes of temperature and precipitation. Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres 115: D08103. http://www.agu.org/pubs/crossref/2010/2009JD012718. shtml (last accessed 9 July 2010).
- Thibeault, J., A. Seth, and G. Wang. Forthcoming. Increased surface drying in the 21st century Altiplano.
- United Nations Development Programme. 2004. Indice de desarrollo humano en los municipios de Bolivia [ Human development index of the municipalities of Bolivia ]. La Paz, Bolivia: United Nations Development Programme.
- Valdivia, C. 2004. Andean livelihoods and the livestock portfolio. Culture and Agriculture 26 (1-2): 19-29.
- Valdivia, C., E. Dunn, and C. Jett´ e. 1996. Diversification as a risk management strategy in an Andean agropastoral community. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 78 (5): 1329-34.
- Valdivia, C., and J. Gilles. 2001. Gender and resource management: Households and groups, strategies and transitions. Agriculture and Human Values 18 (1): 5-9.
- Valdivia, C., J. L. Gilles, C. Jett´ e, R. Quiroz, and R. Espejo. 2003. Coping and adapting to climate variability: The role of assets, networks, knowledge and institutions. In Insights and tools for adaptation: Learning from climate

- variability, 189-99. Washington, DC: NOAA Office of Global Programs, Climate and Societal Interactions.
- Wilby, R. L., and T. M. L. Wigley. 1997. Downscaling general circulation output: A review of methods and limitations. Progress in Physical Geography 21:530-48.
- Wilkins, L. 2001. A primer on risk: An interdisciplinary approach to thinking about public understanding of agbiotech. AgBioForum 4 (3-4): 163-72.
- Yager, K., H. Resnikowski, and S. Halloy. 2008. Grazing and climatic variability in the Sajama National Park, Bolivia. Pirineos 163:97-109.
- Young, K. R., and J. K. Lipton. 2006. Adaptive governance and climate change in the tropical highlands of western South America. Climatic Change 78:63-102.
- Ziervogel, G. 2004. Targeting regional forecasts for integration into household level decisions: The case of smallholder farmers in Lesotho. The Geographical Journal 170 (1): 6-21.
- Zimmerer, K. S. 1993. Soil erosion and labor shortages in the Andes with special reference to Bolivia 1953-91: Implications for conservation with development. World Development 21 (10): 1659-75.

Correspondence: Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Missouri, 200 Mumford Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, e-mail: valdiviac@missouri.edu (Valdivia); Department of Geography, University of Connecticut, 215 Glenbrook Road, Unit 4148, Storrs, CT 06296-4148; e-mail: anji.seth@uconn.edu (Seth); Department of Rural Sociology, University of Missouri, 215 Gentry Hall, Columbia, MO 65211, e-mail: gillesj@missouri.edu (Gilles); Universidad Mayor San Andr´ es, La Paz, Bolivia, e-mail: magalygc1@yahoo.es (Garc´ ıa); CIDES, Universidad Mayor San Andr´ es, La Paz, Bolivia, e-mail: ejimeneza@entelnet.bo (Jim´ enez); Agronomy, Universidad Mayor San Andr´ es, La Paz, Bolivia, e-mail: acusican@gmail.com (Cusicanqui); anavia@umsa.bo (Navia); Edwin.yucra@gmail.com (Yucra).