## USING UPLAND FOREST IN SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE, CHINA*

STEVE S .   W .   XU and C. Y . JIM

ABSTRACT. The Shimentai Nature Reserve in Yingde County, Guangdong Province, China, established recently in a subtropical upland forest area, has served for ages as an essential and customary source of  livelihood  for local people. Assessment  of forest usage  indicates  heavy reliance  by  villagers on its  diversified  biotic  resources.  This  forest  dependence, associated with socioeconomic  factors such as distance from village,  ethnic origin, out-migration  of rural youngsters, and a local tradition of conservation, is unlikely to decline in the near future. The reserve  management  recognizes the need to address the livelihood  issues of  local people and to win local support. A pragmatic adherence to provincial  and higher-level policies that  exclude  forest-tapping activities  could  lead  to more  people-versus-park  conflicts, which would dilute fundamental conservation objectives. A  more enlightened and localized approach that nurtures a synergy between  limited forest use and conservation while helping to develop new income sources could furnish workable alternatives. Keywords: China, forest use, na t 11 m I resources,  na t ure conserva ti0 n, na t 11  re reserve.

3 protected  area (PA) is essential for biodiversity, habitat  conservation, and the delivery of vital ecosystem services (McNeely 1993; Utting 1993; Ceballos-Lascurlin 1996). In  the past  few decades,  many developing countries have  significantly expanded their PA systems (Ghimire 1994). For instance, between 1978 and 2000 China increased its nature reserves rapidly, from 34 to 1,227, incorporating almost 10 percent of its territory. The hasty designation of new PAS has created problems, notably the widespread escalation of peoplepark conflicts (Wells and Brandon 1992; Lewis 1996; Scott 1998; Liu and others 2001). The rising discords in developing countries are attributed largely to an anachronistic PA management myth that nature is separated from people and to the corollary that nature's integrity will be compromised if people are present (Wells and Brandon 1992; IUCN 1999). Limited by this myopic mind-set, reserve authorities usually  relied  on enforcement instruments such as guards, patrols, and penalties to deter and inhibit 'illegal' activities of local inhabitants, including traditional hunting and collection, a tactic epitomized  as 'fences and fines' (Wells and Brandon 1992). PA managers often had to confront the wrath of  local  residents  whose livelihoods were  intertwined with PA natural  resources (Lewis 1996; Harkness 1998). Drowning  in this sea of hostility,  many PAS literally became 'paper parks' with  degraded environmental quality. The pivotal  roles of local inhabitants, including minority peoples, in maintaining biodiversity were un-

We are gratrful  for the  research grant support kindly provided by the Hui Oi Chow Trust  Fund. The study was made possible  through the cooperation and assistance of staffof the  Shimentai Nature  Keserve  Management Bureau and cif  many  local  people and elementary  school teachers  in  Changjiang, Huangdong. Lianshan, Liyu, Shimentai, Shuitou, And Wenfeng Village Committees. Heartfelt thanks are due to Dr. He Guoqiang and Mr. Xiao Yiwen for their support during field trips and to Professor Zhang Jinquan,  Mr. Shi Yuan'an, and Mr. He Kejun for suggesting this study of the Shimentai Nature Reserve.

%b DR. Xu earned his doctorate in geography  at the University of  Hong Kong,  Hong Kong, China, where DR. JIM is a professor  of geography.

fortunately not recognized, and their potential  contributions to the planning and management  of PAS were seldom tapped (Kemf 1993).

PAS cannot continue to coexist with hostile local communities. Since the 1980s people-park conflicts have attracted the attention of a wide spectrum of PA stakeholders, including researchers, park managers, national governments, and international agencies (Zube and Busch 1990; Wells and Brandon 1992; Mehta and Kellert 1998). They have advocated replacing  the paramilitary  approach with  a community-benign one, stressing cooperation and participation of key stakeholders rather than  coercion  (Wells and Brandon 1992; Borrini 1996; Lewis 1996; Hackel 1999). The fundamental shift in mind-set has nurtured the Community Natural Resources Management ( CNRM) conservation paradigm, emphasizing managing biodiversity by, for, and with the interests of local people (Kellert and others 2000). This innovative model is based on the belief that the benefits, costs, responsibilities, and decision-making powers  of PAS should be  shared through  participatory  mechanisms among selected  stakeholders (Scott 1998). CNRM stresses achieving PA conservation objectives by  improving  the social and living standards of  local  inhabitants (Lewis 1996; Kellert and others 2000). In particular, local people are encouraged to utilize  natural  resources  on a sustainable basis  as the means  to mitigate  peoplepark conflicts in developing countries (Utting 1993; Scott 1998).

An  abundance of literature  with  enlightening  findings, especially from forest PAS, has enhanced  our understanding of local use of park resources. For example, natural-resource  extraction is usually limited to a few local people due to the land and resource tenure that predated PA designation (Brandon,  Redford, and Sanderson 1998). The accessibility of forest resources correlates with where local people livepeople who live farther away from a forest use fewer of its resources-while household socioeconomic background, such as size or wealth, plays an important role in resource utilization  (Boer and Baquete 1998; Scott 1998). Some social factors, such as ethnic group and in- and out-migration, also influence the resource-use pattern (Amend and Amend 1995; Boer and Baquete 1998).

In South China some pockets of evergreen broadleaf forests still remain despite centuries of massive forest clearance and conversion. An important reason for their continued existence is the ecosystem's intimate association with one or several material, cultural, or ecological values  of local people (Menzies 1994). The composition of these 'pristine' forests has been modified by long-term preferential selection of some species over others in the course of harvesting, planting, hunting, and gathering (Richardson 1990; Fellowes and Hau 1997). Many decision  makers  have focused narrowly on the natural aspect of forests and marginalized their importance to people. It is necessary  to build a solid knowledge base about the integration  of PAS and local people, in order to preserve the ecological integrity of many nature reserves in China (Harkness 1998; Herrold 1999; Coggins 2000, 2002). The aim of this article is to provide a detailed analysis of local uses of the forest in the recently established Shimentai Nature  Reserve ( SNR) in Yingde County, Guangdong Province, China. The specific objectives are: to quantify the intensive and extensive di-

FIG.  1-Zonation and principal village committees studied in the Shimentai Nature Reserve, Yingde County, Guangdong Province, China. (Cartography by T.  B. Wong, Department of Geography, University of Hong Kong)

<!-- image -->

mensions of local dependence on forest resources, to evaluate the impacts of past and present human activities on the forest ecosystem, to discuss a number of socioeconomic factors that affect forest  preservation,  and to provide  decision  makers with some tentative 'technical fixes' so that biodiversity loss within the reserve can be minimized.

## THE  SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE

Formally established in 1998 as a provincial-rank  nature reserve, the SNR is divided into three concentric zones: core, buffer, and transition (Figure I). The core zone prohibits  human disturbance;  the buffer  zone allows only scientific research  and monitoring; and the transition zone facilitates benign human activities such as scientific research, environmental education, agroforestry, and nature tourism.

The SNR  is located  in northwestern  Yingde County, at approximately 24O22'24O31' N and 113~05 '--113~31' E.  Covering 33,555 hectares, the reserve  extends from east to west and lies about 40 kilometers by road north of Yingde Township. It is by far the largest terrestrial PA  in Guangdong Province. Its significance is enhanced by its contiguity with Luokeng Nature Reserve, to its north in another county. It comprises largely forest lands of fifteen village committees (the lowest  administrative

FIG. 2-Hunting tools (including a matchlock and its associated  flint, gunpowder, bullets, and an iron trap) in a Yao household in Lianshan Village Committee, China. The Yao use these hunting tools to catch large mammals such as wild boars and goats. (Photograph by Steve Xu, December 1999)

<!-- image -->

unit in rural China, usually composed of a number of villages). The forest-dependent population  is  largely concentrated  immediately  outside the SNR, under the administration of Boluo, Hengshitang, Shakou, Shigutang, and Yunling Townships.

Dominated by a subtropical monsoon  climate with alternating moist and dry seasons, most rains fall between April and October and attain totals of more than 2,000 millimeters  per annum. The topography is undulating, higher  in the north and descending toward the south with an altitudinal  range between 200 and 1, 5 8 6 meters. The reserve's 262 mountains have a mean altitude of about 800 meters; the highest  summit is Chuandiding  at 1 , 5 8 6 meters. The varied  topography, climate, and soil nurture a high diversity of habitats, species, and biotic communities.

A reconnaissance biological survey conducted in 1998 recorded 1,173 plant species, and the total species count could exceed 2,000 (YSRZ 19 9 8 ) . Twenty-four  national-level registered endangered plants dwell in the forest.  The  notable ones include Alsophila spinulosa (spiny tree fern) , Fokienia  hodginsii (Fukien cypress), Tsoongiodendron odorum (Tsoong's  tree), Ixonanthes chinensis (Chinese ixonanthes), Brerschneidera  sinensis (Chinese bretschneidera),  and Eurycorymbus cavaleriei (Cavaler eurycorymbus). The survey also identified nineteen national-level endangered ani-

FIG. 3-A China fir (Cutinitighaniia lanceohta) logging site of the Lianshan Village Committee, inside the buffer zone of the Shimentai Nature Reserve. This photograph highlights a dilemma brought t o  the SNH'S managers:  The China fir trees were planted as a result  of the government's  afforestation policy  of 'planters are tree owners,' well before  the SNR was established.  However, the local  people can no longer cut the economic trees inside the nature reserve; nor do they receive adequate pecuniary compensation from the reserve agency. (Photograph by Steve Xu, December 1999)

<!-- image -->

ma1 species, and a thorough survey could  find  more.  The outstanding members include Paiithera tigris anioyensis (tiger), Python  nioliirus bivittatus (python), and Syrmaticas ellioti (pheasant).

Most local residents are Hakka (Han);  the minority are Yao. Agricultural  practices of these two ethnic groups differ. Hakka people usually cultivate a wide range of  subsistence crops, including paddy rice, sweet potato, cassava, taro, vegetables, and fruits. The main cash crops are sugarcane and tobacco, usually mixed with other crops. The sale of agricultural and forest products constitutes the principal revenue for the Hakka. They also engage in some supplementary (principal for some) offfarm, income-generating  activities, such as petty trading, wage-earning work, selfemployment as motorcycle drivers and butchers, or have access to remittances from relatives working as migrant laborers.

In contrast, the Yao people depend heavily on forest-product collection, such as edible fungi, medicinal  herbs, wild  honey, bush meat (Figure 2), and timber (Figure 3). Some Yao  still  practice slash-and-burn  agriculture, but  the activity  has significantly declined, in  part  due to strict  prohibition by  the local  government. They usually supplement their incomes with occasional off-farm jobs, such as working as porters or lumberjacks, and by trading forest products, albeit to a lesser extent in comparison with the Hakka.

~~

TARLE I-(:HARACTERISTICS OF THE SEVEN SELECTED VILLAGE COMMITTEES WITHIN OR ADIACENT TO THE SHIMENTAI NATURE KESERVE, GUANGDONG PROVINCE, CHINA

- ~~

| VILI.AGE COMMITTRE   | POPULATION (NUMRFA OF HOUSEH0LI)S)   | TOTAI. NL!MBEK OF VILLAGES (NUMREROF VILLACF.S SURVEYED)   | TOTAL NUMRER OF HOUSEHOLDS SURVEYED (NUMREROF HOUSEHOLDS SURVEYED IN UEPTH)   | PROXIMITY TO THE KESERVE   | ETHNIC CROUP   | TOWNSHIP AFFILIATION   |
|----------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------|------------------------|
| Changjiang           | 2,796 (626)                          | 30 (27)                                                    | 7 0 ( 1 )                                                                     | Far                        | Hakka          | Shigutang              |
| Liyu                 | 2.971 (632)                          | 27 (19)                                                    | 64 ( 6 )                                                                      | Far                        | Hakka          | Shigutang              |
| Wenfeng              | 2,039 (425)                          | 16 (16)                                                    | 60 (0)                                                                        | Far                        | Hakka          | Hengshitang            |
| Huangdong            | 8 19 ( 156)                          | 9 ( 8 )                                                    | 15 (6)                                                                        | Near                       | Hakka          | Shigutang              |
| Lianshan             | 476 (94)                             | 4 (4)                                                      | I6 ( 6 )                                                                      | Near                       | Yao            | Shigutang              |
| Shimentai            | - (66)                               | 4 (4)                                                      | 14 (10)                                                                       | Near                       | Yao            | Hengshitang            |
| Shuitou              | 1,542 (197)                          | 12 (12) .                                                  | 58 (0) ~~~~ ~~~~                                                              | Near ~ .                   | Hakka          | Yunling ~              |

~~

~

~

~

Revenues generated from selling native products are usually spent on a variety of  necessities,  particularly  children's  compulsory education, which  in  practice  is financially self-reliant in  rural China, including tuition, textbooks, stationery, and other supplies. Daily necessities, such as sugar, tea, meat, soap, cooking oil, electricity, and, for some households, gasoline for a  motorcycle  are also major  expenditures. Industrial products to support farming, such as fertilizers, pesticides, farming tools, crop seeds, and spores of edible fungi consume considerable resources. Also important are outlays for durable commodities, such as television  sets, videocassette players, and bicycles and motorcycles. Finally, agricultural taxes and township government  levies must be met. Surplus  money in a good year is often saved to meet unpredictable or ad hoc expenditures, such as a wedding, house construction, or grave illness.

## DATA  COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS

Two in situ surveys were conducted, focusing on the household level. A reconnaissance survey conducted in September 1999 was followed by a questionnaire survey in December 1999. Based on distance to the reserve and forest-use intensity, seven village committees-Changjiang, Liyu, Wenfeng, Huangdong, Lianshan, Shimentai, and Shuitou-were selected for study (Figure 1, Table I). Huangdong, Lianshan, Shimentai, and Shuitou are situated within the reserve or have rights to forests within it; they form the 'near-zone''  group. Changjiang, Liyu, and Wenfeng, located in the floodplain of the Lianjiang River with less access to the forest, form the 'far-zone' group. Each village committee administers from four to thirty villages.

Four data-collection methods-main plus supplementary  questionnaire  surveys, face-to-face interviews, organized group discussions, and in situ observation-were utilized, and nature reserve official records and local gazetteers were  reviewed. In

TABLE 11-PERCENTAGES OF SURVEYED HOUSEHOLI)S EXPLOITING ELEVEN KINDS OF FOREST RESOURCES  IN THE SEVEN VILLAGE COMMITTEES WITHIN OR ADJACENT TO THE SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE, GUANCDONC PROVINCE, CHINA^

. .  \_ \_ ~

| RESOURCE                             | CHANGJIANG (FAR)   |   LlYU (FAR) |      |   HUANGDONG (NEAR) |   LIANSHAN (NEAR) |   5HlMENrAl (NEAR) |   SHUITOU (NEAR) |
|--------------------------------------|--------------------|--------------|------|--------------------|-------------------|--------------------|------------------|
| Fragrant mushrooms (Lentinus edodes) | I .7               |          6.1 |  1.8 |               53.3 |              62.5 |               85.7 |             77.2 |
| White fungi (Aurici4larin nuricitln) | 1.7                |          4.5 |  1.8 |               33.3 |              75   |               71.4 |             70.2 |
| Bamboo shoots                        | 6.8                |         22.7 | 26.3 |               66.7 |              50   |               50   |             91.2 |
| Tea                                  | 1.7                |          1.5 |  5.3 |               20   |              37.5 |               42.9 |             63.2 |
| Mixed timber                         | 10.2               |          1.5 |  0   |               86.7 |              43.8 |                7.1 |             84.2 |
| (Cnnoderttin spp.) Lingzhi fungi     | 0.0                |          0   |  0   |               60   |              18.8 |               50   |             50.9 |
| Wild honey                           | 3.4                |          0   |  5.3 |               20   |              50   |               57.1 |             50   |
| Firewood                             | 78.0               |         96.9 | 35.1 |              100   |             100   |              100   |             96.5 |
| Wild canes                           | 0.0                |          4.5 |  0   |               60   |              12.5 |               14.3 |             21.1 |
| Medicinal plants                     | 8.6                |          7.7 |  1.8 |               46.7 |              16.7 |                7.1 |             58.9 |
| Wild animals                         | 13.8               |          7.6 |  0   |               46.7 |              50   |               71.4 |             61.9 |

-  -~

The survey was conducted in December 1999. 'Near'  and 'far'  in the column headings refer to proximity to the Shimentai Nature Reserve.

the questionnaire survey, because a j i a (equivalent to an extended household in the West) constitutes the basic unit of shared economic production  and resource utilization in rural China, it is not unusual to have more than one hu (officially registered household) in a  jia. Most rural jias still preserve the Chinese tradition of several generations living under the same roof. The mean value is 1.83 hus per jia (based on eighty-two responses).  Hereinafter, 'household' refers to jia.

The main questionnaire survey explored the collection  of forest products and their quantities, household income, and expenditure profile, as well as respondents' knowledge and perceptions  of, and expectations and attitudes toward, the SNR. Socioeconomic information  about respondents' backgrounds  (gender, education level, and years of formal education), household characteristics (size and composition, ethnic group, wealth, out-migration  of younger generations, and numbers of school children) was also gleaned. A total of 297 households was randomly selected from the seven village committees to participate in the survey. A stratified sampling approach  was employed to ensure proportional representation  of households of villages in each village committee.

An  in-depth supplementary  questionnaire  survey was conducted  respectively for Hakka and Yao peoples. The goal of this survey was to probe details of past and

present  forest-use patterns.  Both  fixed-response  and open-ended questions were adopted and were targeted at near-zone households showing a high level of forest dependence. The sample size in this case is relatively small: sixteen Yao and thirteen Hakka households were successfully interviewed.

Local primary school teachers were recruited as research assistants and trained to administer the questionnaires. The use of  local  teachers  as interviewers  could minimize non-sampling  errors in the following ways. First, as teachers of local children, they were able to win  if  not  command respondents' trust. Second, because most local teachers were conversant in local languages  (Hakka dialect or Yao language), effective communication was facilitated. Third, as the best-educated group in the villages, they were able to understand the research objectives and the gist of the questions,  helping  to convey faithfully the intended research  message. Interviewees were selected randomly in accordance with a prescribed interview quota in the chosen villages. Because most respondents were male household heads, the interview approach inevitably has resulted in a gender imbalance.

Survey data were analyzed using the Statistical Package for the Social Sciences ( SPSS) version 9.0. The number of forest uses indicated by respondents formed the basis for assigning a numerical value (0-11) to each surveyed household. Statistical analyses helped to evaluate whether some demographic variables could explain the varied patterns  in household  dependence on forest resources. The influence of the distance  factor was gauged  by the Student's t-test;  of  the ethnic variable, by  the Mann-Whitney test. For the influence of wealth, household size, and migrant labor variables, one-way analysis of variance was applied.

## HOUSEHOLDS AND FOREST  RESOURCES

A total of 274 men and 10 women were successfully interviewed. The respondents ranged in age from 17 to 76, with an average of 44.2 years. About 90 percent of them claimed  Hakka  (Han) extraction; 10 percent, Yao.  Some 3 percent  of  the respondents were illiterate, and 48 percent were educated through the primary level. About 32 percent  of  respondents had attended junior high  school, and 17 percent  had reached the senior high school level. The majority of respondents (64 percent) described their household economic  status as average in their respective villages. Only 11 percent of the respondents ranked their households as rich, whereas 25 percent rated themselves as poor. In terms of  livelihood improvement after China's inception of the open-door policy (since 1978), most respondents (92 percent) reported a better life than before. Approximately half of the households  had one or several members working as migrant laborers, mainly in the prosperous Pearl River Delta Region 200-300 kilometers away. Household size varied significantly, ranging from 2 to 2 1 members, with a mean size of 5.97.

The percentages of households exploiting different types of resources from the forest are presented in Table 11. The majority collected one or more types. In particular, there was no marked difference in the collection  of  firewood between  the far-zone and near-zone communities.  Regardless of distance from the reserve, the

FIG. 4-A cultivation site of white fungus (Auricrdnria auriculn) in the forest of the Lianshan Village Committee. Cultivation of edible fungi basically follows this sequence: cutting down some particular trees, dcbarking them, cutting their trunks into segments, making holes in the segnierits with a special hammer, placing them under a tree canopy, and putting purchased spores into the holes. The practice contributed to a decline in the stock of  certain broadleaf  tree species in the forest.  (Photograph  by Steve Xu, September 1999)

<!-- image -->

livelihood of local people to a varying extent relied on the forest. Near-zone households harvested all eleven resources on the list, with a much higher level of resource use than that of their far-zone counterparts. Thus households in the near-zone depended extensively on forest resources. Concerning the influence of ethnicity, Yao respondents  tended to focus on collecting edible fungi (fragrant mushrooms and white fungi) and honey and on hunting wild animals; the Hakka exploitation pattern was more diversified and extensive.

The listed  forest products fall into two broad  groups, those obtained  with human cultivation efforts and those acquired without them. The collection of edible fungi (Figure 4), bamboo shoots,  tea, and wild honey requires intensive labor. Without appropriate and active forest-cultivation efforts, the collection of such products would be far less productive. Another group of forest products-mixed hardwood timber, lingzhi (Ganoderrna spp., a medicinal  fungus), wild  canes (Figure 5), medicinal plants, and wild animals (mainly as bush meat)-are usually collected without continual inputs by local communities. Harvesting forest products with the aid of intensive human efforts and skills could provide a stable and predictable source of revenue, in comparison with other supplementary  means of income derived from collecting unmanaged forest products.

FIG. 5-Bundles of wild cane in front of a Yao house in Lianshan Village Committee. Wild cane can be used to make cane furniture and utensils. (Photograph by Steve Xu, September 1999)

<!-- image -->

Although it is obvious that the vast majority of local households (in particular those living within and closest to the nature reserve) relied on the forest for a living, this says little about the intensity of forest dependence, especially the contribution of selling slintzlirio (non-timber forest products) for household  income. The magnitude of dependence was evaluated by ranking the major income sources of each surveyed household. Respondents were asked to estimate the percentage contribution of each income source in 1998 (listed in Table 111). The raw data were processed into the mean  percentage  of individual income source in each village committee, and the percentages were then converted into ranks.

Table I11  suggests  that the ranking of  major income sources is related  to distance to the reserve. Far-zone households were mainly dependent on revenues derived  from cultivating  economic crops and sideline activities. Remittances  from migrant laborers and earnings from 'other' channels constituted two important sources of supplementary income. For far-zone households, the revenues derived from the forest, as expected, rank the lowest  in the income list.  In  contrast, the revenues of  near-zone households  depended more heavily on selling forest products.

Yao  and Hakka  residents  differed in  the intensity and mode of forest dependence as well. For the Yao, income derived from 'other' items, mainly from occasional wages, was more relevant. The work, according to the face-to-face interviews, was largely confined to forest activities, including service as field guides for scien-

TABLE 111-RANKINGS OF PRINCIPAL SOURCES OF INCOME  IN THE SEVEN VILLAGE COMMITTEES WITHIN AND ADJACENT TO THE SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE, GUANGDONG PROVINCE, CHINA^

\_\_

|            |                   |              | SOURCE OF             | SOURCE OF   | SOURCE OF        | SOURCE OF       | SOURCE OF                 |   SOURCE OF |
|------------|-------------------|--------------|-----------------------|-------------|------------------|-----------------|---------------------------|-------------|
| VILLAGE    | PROXIMITY         | PROXIMITY    | All Forest Non-Timber |             | Mi rant La\orc . | Cash Crop -...- | Sideline Activityd Othere |             |
| COMMITTEE  | TOTHE RESERVE ___ | ETHNIC GROUP | Products              | Timberb     | Mi rant La\orc . | Cash Crop -...- | Sideline Activityd Othere |             |
| Changjiang | Far               | Hakka        | 6                     | 5           | 3                | 1               | 2                         |           4 |
| Liyu       | Far               | Hakka        | 6                     | 5           | 4                | 1               | 2                         |           3 |
| Wenfeng    | Far               | Hakka        | 5                     | 6           | 3                | 2               | 1                         |           4 |
| Huangdong  | Near              | Hakka        | 4                     | 1           | 5                | 3               | 2                         |           6 |
| Lianshan   | Near              | Yao          | 1                     | 2           | 4                | 6               | 5                         |           3 |
| Shimentai  | Near              | Yao          | 1                     | 5           | 3                | 6               | 4                         |           2 |
| Shuitou    | Near              | Hakka        | 2                     | 3           | 4                | 6               | 3                         |           5 |

tists,  miners,  or lumbermen.  For the Hakka,  a larger  proportion of  revenues  was derived  from sideline activities related to the forest. For example, Huangdong villagers are renowned  for their  skill in weaving elaborate bamboo mattresses  and utensils  to add extra handicraft  value  to their  products. According  to interviews with local government officials, the mean annual per capita income of the Hakka was more than twice that of the Yao.

To gain insights into the nature of local forest dependence, some demographic factors were assessed statistically (Table IV). Regarding the spatial nature of forest dependence, the distinction between near-zone and far-zone households was marked (z = 2 1 . 4 , p &lt;o.ooi). A typical near-zone household  collected on average 6. 5 4 types of listed  products  from the forest, whereas far-zone families on average collected only 1 . 2 1 product types.

It was hypothesized  that the poorer sector in a specific forest-dependent  population  relies more  extensively on the forest for a living. This assumption  was not supported by the survey. Whether a household was categorized as rich, average, or poor had no significant  differential  impact on the number of  its forest uses (F = 0. 2 8 9 , p not significant). After excluding the proximity factor,  Yao and Hakka peoples were significantly different in terms of forest dependence (z = -2 . 9 4 ,   p &lt;0.003). On average the number of resource uses of the near-zone Hakka people was 6. 9 9 , whereas

'TAHLk.  IV-MEAN  NUMHERS 01: FOREST USES MEASURED IN  KELATION TO A  NUMHER OF  DEMOGRAPHIC FACTORS, WITH z OR FVALUES AN11 LEVELS OF SIGNIFICANCE, SHlMENTAl NA'rUKE RESEKVE, GUANCDONG PROVINCE, CHINA

<!-- image -->

| (:ATEGORY                                                              | MEAN NUMBER OF TYPES OF FOREST PRODUCTS USED                           | EFFECTIVE SAMPLE SIZE                                                  |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Distance from the reserve (T-test: z = 2 1 . 4 ; ~<O.OOI) -            | Distance from the reserve (T-test: z = 2 1 . 4 ; ~<O.OOI) -            | Distance from the reserve (T-test: z = 2 1 . 4 ; ~<O.OOI) -            |
| Fdr                                                                    | 1.21                                                                   | 178                                                                    |
| Near                                                                   | 6.54                                                                   | 97                                                                     |
| Wealth (one-way ANOVA: F = 0.289; P not significant) -. . .._ -~       | Wealth (one-way ANOVA: F = 0.289; P not significant) -. . .._ -~       | Wealth (one-way ANOVA: F = 0.289; P not significant) -. . .._ -~       |
| Kich                                                                   | 3.19                                                                   | 31                                                                     |
| Averdge                                                                | 3.16                                                                   | 174                                                                    |
| Poor                                                                   | 2.82                                                                   | 6X                                                                     |
| E t h n i c group (Mann-Whitneytest: z = -2.94; p <o.o03)              | E t h n i c group (Mann-Whitneytest: z = -2.94; p <o.o03)              | E t h n i c group (Mann-Whitneytest: z = -2.94; p <o.o03)              |
| Hakka                                                                  | 6.99                                                                   | 71                                                                     |
| Yao                                                                    | 5.31                                                                   | 26                                                                     |
| Household size (one-way ANOVA: F = 1.54; p not significant) -~ - .     | Household size (one-way ANOVA: F = 1.54; p not significant) -~ - .     | Household size (one-way ANOVA: F = 1.54; p not significant) -~ - .     |
| Sniall                                                                 | 2.46                                                                   | 61                                                                     |
| Medium                                                                 | 3.3 1                                                                  | 131                                                                    |
| Ldrgc                                                                  | 3.2 1                                                                  | 77                                                                     |
| ~ ~                                                                    |                                                                        |                                                                        |
| Benefit from migrant labor (one-way ANOVA: F = 5.303; p <0.006) - __ ~ | Benefit from migrant labor (one-way ANOVA: F = 5.303; p <0.006) - __ ~ | Benefit from migrant labor (one-way ANOVA: F = 5.303; p <0.006) - __ ~ |
| None                                                                   | 3.2 I                                                                  | 146                                                                    |
| Low                                                                    | 3.52                                                                   | 91                                                                     |
| Medium o r high                                                        |                                                                        |                                                                        |

that of the Yao was 5 . 3 1 . Because the data were not gleaned from a large sample ( n = 97), the possibility of  sampling error exists.

Empirical evidence gathered through fieldwork indicates that those households benefiting from migrant-labor  remittance may have lower forest dependence. This hypothesis was strongly supported by the data (F= 5.303,~ &lt;0.006). On average, for households that  indicated  receiving a medium or high level of such a benefit, the number of forest use was as low as  1 . 5 3 (n = 3 6 ) . For those claiming meager or no benefits, the number of  forest  uses  was higher, 3 . 5 2 ( n = 91) and 3 . 2 1 ( n = 146), respectively.

The extent to which  household  size contributes to forest dependence was explored. There was no obvious association between household size and the number of forest uses (F = 1 . 5 4 , p not significant). The mean number of forest uses in small households  (two to four members) was 2. 4 6 ( n = 61), whereas the medium-sized (five  or six  members) and large households  (seven or more members) registered 3 . 3 1 (n = 131) and 3.21 ( n = 77) uses, respectively.

TABLE V-RESPONDENTS' PERCEPTIONS OF CHANGES I N   FREQUENCY OF ENCOUNTERS WITH VARIOUS PLANT  ANI) WILDLIFE SPECIES I N  RECENT  DECADES, SHIMENTAI NATURE RESERVE, GUANGDONG PROVINCE,CHINA

|                                                                           | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   | NO DON'T   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|------------|
|                                                                           | INCREASE   | INCREASE   | CHANGE     | CHANGE     | DFLREASE   | DFLREASE   | KNOW       | KNOW       |
| FOREST ITEM                                                               | Y n        | NO.        | %J         | No.        | %I         | No.        | Y n        | No.        |
| Quantity of hardwood trees suitable for cultivation of fragrant mushrooms | 1 1 . 1    | 3          | 7.4        | 2          | 74.1       | 20         | 7.4        | 2          |
| Quantity of broadleaf trees suitable for white fungus cultivation         | 30.8       | 8          | 3.8        | 1          | 61.5       | 16         | 3.8        | 1          |
| Availability of hardwood trees with high market demand                    | 23.8       | 5          | 19.0       | 4          | 47.6       | 10         | 9.5        | 2          |
| Quantity of wildlife species                                              | 3.6        | 1          | 0.0        | 0          | 82.1       | 23         | 14.3       | 4          |
| Availability of bush meat                                                 | 0.0        | 0          | 0.0        | 0          | 96.4       | 27         | 3.6        | 1          |

## PAST  AND PRESENT FOREST-USE TRENDS

The SNR management agency was quite concerned about whether forest resources were being exploited sustainably, due to the pressure of rising external market demand in recent years. This concern encouraged  a detailed study to assess the impacts of local forest use on the protected  flora and fauna and their habitats in the past few decades. The fundamental difficulty in carrying out an impact study is the absence of  a systematic baseline biological  survey, not to mention continual biological monitoring, before the creation of the SNR. Consequently, an objective assessment based on long-term scientific study is nearly impossible. But because the forest is home to many local residents, their perception  about changes in the form of frequencies  of  encounters with  certain  plant  and wildlife  species, albeit  somewhat subjective in nature, can provide a surrogate measure for a broad-brush and indicative assessment. The results can assist decision makers in instituting and implementing a management plan.

The in-depth questionnaire surveys asked each respondent to report his or her personal perception of changes in the frequencies of encounters with specific plant and wildlife species in the forest, in comparison to the frequency a decade ago or during the respondent's  childhood. The results, listed  in Table V,  indicate  that  a drastic decline has occurred in encounters with many species. It is apparent that the forest biota associated with the livelihood of local communities has been exploited in  an unsustainable  manner over the past  two decades.  In  addition, because  the harvesting patterns may not be distributed evenly, forest areas with easy accessibility or specific species with  high contemporaneous market values were more likely to be subject to overharvesting. This is especially alarming for those plant and animal products for which external market demand is ever increasing.

Examining the extent and nature of local forest dependence is key in preparing a  rational  management plan  for the nascent  nature reserve.  The research  results

indicate  that  the majority of  local  households  relied  to a varying  degree on the forest for their livelihood. Thus they have direct and indirect interests in the future direction of SNR management. If the needs of stakeholders can be addressed appropriately, they are more likely to be enlisted  as active participants in forest protection. Because local dependence encompasses a wide range of resources, the nature reserve authorities have considerable policy latitude  within  which  to balance the conflicting interests of the park and the people. For instance, by allowing some sustainable  or less  destructive  forest  uses to be  conducted  in  a sustainable  manner, such as collection of wild honey, bamboo shoots, and firewood, substantial benefits could be legitimately expected by the local people without causing appreciable harm to the forest ecosystem.

The results also demonstrate that a geographical  differentiation  in local forest dependence exists. Near-zone households exploit a disproportionately larger number  of  forest  resources than  do their far-zone counterparts. A similar pattern  applies to revenues obtained from forest products. The number of forest uses differs between Yao  and near-zone Hakka peoples.

Emigration of the younger generation affords a positive factor in conserving the forest  ecosystem. The migration  is  triggered  by  the pull  factor  of  relatively high wages earned by migrant workers engaged in off-farm jobs in the Pearl River Delta Region (Woon 1999). Such variations in the pattern of local forest dependence calls for flexibility in the management of the SNR, which should duly consider the diversified and changing needs of local people.

The study did not find a statistical association between the level of local forest uses and household size or household  affluence. The result implies that, unless local forest dependence can be significantly offset by supplementary income sources, the villagers will continue to exploit the forest even if a household shrinks in size or becomes  richer.

A variety of effective local conservation  practices, which are closely associated with  religious beliefs whether  in the form of lineage forest, fengshui forest  (Figure 6), or holy  or temple  forest, prevailed  in  South China during the imperial  era (Menzies 1994).  In the SNR forests, community forest ownership, de facto or de jure, still exists. Group discussions with some local people revealed that a non-community member, even living adjacent to the forest, could not tap forest resources-except to collect firewood-without the owner's prior permission. These effective modes of traditional  local protection partly account for the confinement of high-level forest uses to near-zone households. The continual operation of indigenous codes or conventions on the right to enter and harvest forest resources, largely based on geopolitical units, is still appreciated, albeit not always strictly observed, by local people. The local traditional tenure of these forest lands (Coggins 2002), confiscated by the authorities in an earlier period, was reinstated  by the local government in the postMao era (Li and Li  1994, 208-211). This institutional change, resulting in  a welldefined  official and  traditional  land-tenure regime, has  recently augmented the popular  sense of  forest  ownership  and  contributed  to the  rapid  development of

forestry and improved maintenance of remnant forests in many parts of China (Liu and Morrison 1999).

Some healthy practices of local communities have declined or even disappeared, however. A case in point is the temple forest of Xihua Buddhist Temple, the ruin of which  can  still be spotted on a hill  behind  the Shuitou Village Committee. This forest, mentioned in an old Guangdong gazetteer (difangzhi) (Gui i933), has been replaced  by plantations of citrus, China fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata), and South China pine (Pinus massoniana). The temple had occupied  its site since the Tang Dynasty (A.D. 618-907), but it was completely destroyed during the era of the Great Leap Forward (1958-1960) and the Cultural Revolution (1966-1976).

Minority peoples in China, most of whom reside in the mountainous regions in which  many nature reserves are located, play a contradictory role in  biodiversity conservation. On one hand, they help protect flora and fauna, due to their religious beliefs and veneration of natural spirits (Liu and others 2002). These religious beliefs usually  were  effectively integrated with the time-honored local  conservation knowledge and relayed to younger generations through various forms of traditional social and religious organizations. The Yao people in the study area used to have the Yao Zhang system. In this structure the respected elders of the Yao Village Council, chosen by popular consent, usually served as arbitrators  in community public affairs, including those related  to the forest. By  minimizing unsustainable activities in the forest, this system has proved to be an effective protective instrument (Lee 1939; He 1999). Unfortunately, the role of the  time-honored social fabric and associated natural taboos was completely dissolved during the Mao era. Now the Yao people can utilize forest resources at will without being punished and repudiated by the community. A certain  measure of  residual  sanction, however, still lingers because  fear of punishment by the mountain spirits is innate.

On the other hand, the population growth rate  of these ethnic minorities is increasing the ecological pressure on already vulnerable PA ecosystems  (Liu and others 2001). To some extent this situation reflects the fact that, since the i97os, the fertility rate of minority groups on the whole is higher than that of their Han counterparts. This occurs because the central government grants a special privilege to the minorities by relaxing the national family-planning policy (Attane and Courbage 2000). In the Lianshan Yao Village Committee, for example, the population in 1999 was triple that in the early 1950s.

The provincial PA agencies erroneously  believed  that the acquisition  of  forest land rights by  nature reserves  from local  communities could effectively  reduce people-park  conflicts (Zhang 1997,325-327), which they perceived as being driven in part by population growth. With such a constricted mind-set, a provincial directive issued to local governments that had one or more nature reserves, which  required  local  authorities to 'conduct a comprehensive survey on forest land titles within nature reserves, to transfer these forest land rights to the nature reserve agencies, and to publicize the outcome to the pub1ic'by the end of 2000 (GSRZ 2000,15), seemed a perfectly logical approach. In common with other nature reserves, all the

FIG. &amp;A culturally protected Wet paddy rice cultivation is the Xu, September 1999) fengshui forest behind a Hakka village in Shuitou Village Committee. main agricultural activity of the Hakka people. (Photograph by Steve

<!-- image -->

forest land rights within the park were to have been transferred de jure to the SNR Management  Bureau. Meeting this requirement was essential  if  the SNR were to obtain approval as a provincial-rank  nature reserve and receive financial support from the provincial government.

This inconsiderate approach has induced indirectly destructive policies and practices by local governments. From the standpoint of local people, the separation of de jure from de facto land right  serves to obscure rather than to clarify the legal framework within  the reserve forest. Depriving local communities of their  forest land resources triggered various adverse impacts on the forest environment. First, after losing their forest  rights to the reserve agency, local people lost their sense of ownership and hence were less likely to safeguard the forest, although they still had stakes and interests in it. Second, because the reserve agency lacked the institutional capacity to enforce relevant  government directives and laws on restricting forest uses, local  people  could  continue to operate as they always had  with  few fetters, though in an officially  'illegal' way. Third, the local code of forest use, which hitherto had been  effective in excluding non-community members from using forest resources and is closely associated with customary land rights of  local communities, is in danger of being disrupted. The rather draconian and incongruous 'fences and fines' exclusion mechanism that the local government prefers certainly is not a feasible substitute for the indigenous mechanisms for local protection.

## MANAGEMENT DILEMMAS AND ALTERNATIVES

The survey assessment  results concerning local  forest  uses highlight  a dilemma facing reserve  managers. On one hand, because  certain commercially oriented resources  have been  overharvested, the need to regulate  forest  uses  is  obvious. However, forcibly restricting people from tapping the resources does not seem to be a feasible strategy. It engenders  an atmosphere  of heightened conflict, as people's very livelihood or even survival is at risk. Punishments for illegal forest uses seldom are effective because local people can easily find loopholes by undertaking social avoidance activities, such as felling trees at night and trading wildlife on the black  market, that minimize their chances of  being caught  (Garvie and Keeler 1994; Albers and Grinspoon 1997). Legalizing controlled and mutually agreeable local  access  to forest  resources  would  therefore be  an effective  alternative. But managers fear adopting this strategy, because it risks imposition of more use pressure on the forest environment. This is especially true when a high  demand for forest products prevails, and villagers are still able to meet their economic aspirations by defying the imposed regulations.

In  reality, the local government subscribed to a policing approach to manage the reserve ( YSGAJ 1999) while admitting its deficiency. Adopting  the 'fences and fines' approach was a straightforward  response to a call by the provincial  government to  'combat illegal activities of hunting, cutting, collecting and quarrying  within nature reserve[s]' (GSRZ 2000,iB). Despite doubts about the efficacy of the paramilitary approach,  the SNR management agency was quite aware that unless it heeded the provincial directive, its chance of obtaining  badly needed external funding could be jeopardized.

There is an urgent  need to allow forest-dependent  communities to have alternatives before the imposition of restrictive regulations. The provision of livelihood alternatives by means of CNRM development-oriented  initiatives plays a vital part in attaining this goal (Wells and Brandon 1992; Kellert and others 2000). Several cognate initiatives have  been proposed or enforced to provide economic alternatives for some neighboring SNR communities in an attempt to win local support for forest  regulation.  In  particular,  the  SNR  Management Bureau  chose  to support the Wenfeng and Shimentai Village Committees in a recent  round of the countywide improvement campaign  intended to help rural people plant  fruit trees in the hill lands adjacent to the reserve. According to a contract signed with Wenfeng Village, the reserve authority agreed to provide continuous financial and technological support for thirty years and to seek only a nominal share of the fruit harvest.

But efforts to provide alternatives for  local people may encounter obstacles. First, the critical linkage between conservation and development  may be missing (Wells and Brandon 1992). This is a lack of an effective institutional setup to permit some limited and compatible developments without compromising conservation objectives. Second, the development initiatives earmarked to help forest-dependent people rely heavily on external financial support from higher governmental  levels, which usually frown on the chronic insufficiency of aid recipients (Albert 1996). Thus ex-

ternal  funding is  unlikely to be  forthcoming unless  regional  authorities are convinced  of  the validity  of  local  development initiatives, which  may be a difficult selling job to accomplish. Third, forest dependence is unlikely to be offset completely by the revenues arising from development efforts even  in optimal cases. This occurs because, apart from being perceived as an important income source, local people commonly attach additional values to the forest: for instance, in support of cultural, ceremonial, food security, and health needs (Scott 1998). Finally, this study has  pinpointed how, even  without  alternative income opportunities locally, a small number of local households managed to reduce their level of forest dependence through the out-migration of younger generations. Assisting local people  in finding external development opportunities, such as the provision of work-skills training and help in job hunting, is a constructive  alternative policy instrument for some nature reserve agencies in China, in particular those located in less poor regions.

## POLICY I  M P LI  CAT  ION s

The findings of this study indicate that many local people depend to varying degrees on the forest resources within the SNR for a living and that such forest dependence is unlikely to decline in the near future. These local forest resource extraction activities are bound to have had a negative impact on some flora and fauna. Additionally, spatial and social differentiations in forest dependence exist. Some socioeconomic factors, such as distance to the reserve, ethnic origin, out-migration of local youngsters, and a local tradition of conservation, can affect the level of  forest use. Consequently, addressing the miscellaneous interests of local people will be an imperative for the nature reserve agency if existing people-park conflicts are to be reduced or resolved.

Unfortunately, a policing management paradigm, which does nothing but intensify the conflicts, was adopted. The SNR agency had to align with the administrative directive of the provincial government that supported drastic measures, even though local  administrators were  quite aware of the drawbacks. Otherwise, the chance of acquiring financial support from the provincial government, one of the justifications for creating the SNR, could be jeopardized. In addition, the provincial directive does not contradict  the relevant national laws or regulations. These controversies highlight the fact that the resolution of people-park conflicts in China is still a complicated and sensitive issue. Some agreement has emerged that conservation strategies in China should give more consideration to the needs and opinions of the local people  (Wen, Yin, and Wu 1998; Coggins 2000). Nurturing a synergy between limited forest use in the wider context of conservation could find a happy medium. The need to find appropriate and localized solutions, rather than imposing a uniform panacea, cannot be overstressed. Applying the well-recognized process- or development-oriented CNRM approaches in China remains difficult, due to the absence of a supportive network of indigenous environmental nongovernmental organizations. Despite its good intentions, the government acting alone cannot properly handle the existing problems.

Even in the absence of substantial government-propelled  conservation  efforts, the forest within the nature reserve can still be maintained and protected  by local people due to the widespread  practice of customary conservation  mechanisms  in rural China. Consequently,  existing government polices  or regulations  associated with nature reserves can be molded to encompass the long-established, but somewhat enfeebled, conservation wisdom and to refrain from disrupting the time-honored equilibrium. The fine local living-within-nature  tradition needs to be revived and reinforced, so that the innate desire to protect ecosystem integrity can be mobilized and such conservation can truly become everyone's concern and practice. The findings of this study also demonstrate that some households  have benefited economically from the out-migration of the younger generations, with the by-product of reducing the level of their forest dependence. Assisting more local  residents in finding alternatives to local forest resources for the support of their families, rather than directly providing funds from external sources, can furnish an effective conservation-with-development  strategy in China and other developing countries.

## REFERENCES

- Albers, H.,  and  E.  Grinspoon.  1997. A Comparison  of  the  Enforcement of Access Restrictions between  Xishuanbanna  Nature Reserve (China) and Khao Yai  National Park  (Thailand). Erivirontnental Conservation 24 (4):  351-362.
- Albert, P. 1996.  Integrated Conservation and Development Projects. BioScierice 46 (11):  845-4355.
- Amend, S . , and T. Amend, eds.  1995. Natiorial  Parks without  People? The South America Experience. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.
- Attane, I.,  and Y . Courbage.  2000.  Transitional  Stages and Identity Boundaries: The Case of Ethnic Minorities in China. Popiclation and Eriviroiiment 21 (3): 257-280.
- Boer, W. E. D., and D. S. Baquete.  1998.  Natural Resource Use, Crop Damage and Attitudes of  Rural People in the Vicinity  of  the Maputo  Elephant  Reserve, Mozambique. Envirorinierital Conservation 25 (3): 208-218.
- Borrini, G.  1996. Collaborative Mariagement of Protected Areas: Tailoring the Approach to the Context. Gland, Switzerland IUCN.
- Brandon, K., K.  H.  Redford, and S. E.  Sanderson.  1998. Parks in  Peril: People, Politics,  and Protected Areas. Washington, D.C.:  The Nature Conservancy and Island  Press.
- Ceballos-Lascuriiin, H.  1996. Toirrism, Ecotourisni and Protected Areas. Gland, Switzerland:  IUCN.
- Coggins, C. R. 2000. Wildlife Conservation and Bamboo Management in China's Southeast Uplands. Geographical Review 90 (I): 83-111.
- . 2002. The Tiger atid the Pangolin: Nature, Culture arid Conservation in China. Honolulu: University  of  Hawaii  Press.
- Fellowes, J.  R.,  and  B.  C.  H. Hau.  1997. A  Faiinal  Survey of  Nine  Forest  Reserves  in  Tropical South China, with a  Review of  Conservation Priorities  in  the Region. Hong Kong: Kadoorie Farm and Botanic Garden.
- Garvie, D., and A. Keeler.  1994.  Incomplete Enforcemeiit  with  Endogenous Regulatory Choice. loiirrial ofPublic Ecorioniics 55  (I):  141-162.
- Ghimire, K.  B.  1994.  Parks and People: Livelihood Issues in National Park Management  in Thailand and Madagascar. Developnient arid Change 25 ( I ) : 195-229.
- GSRZ [ Guangdong Sheng Renmin Zhengfu  (Guangdong  People's Government)]. 2000. Zhuanfa Guangdong Sheng Renmin Daibiao Dahui Changwu Weiyuanhui Guanyu Jia Kuai Ziran Baohuqu Jianshe de Jueyi de Tongzhi  (Notification on Forwarding the Resolution  of  the Standing Committee of Guangdong People's Congress on 'Speeding up the Development of Nature Reserves'). Guangdong Gazetteer 2000 (I): 12-35.
- Gui, W. C., ed.  1933 [1897]. Guangdong T u Shuo (Describing Guangdong by Maps). Vol. 21. Jiangsu, China:  Reprinted by Guangling Traditional Chinese Books Publishing House.

- Hackel, J.  D. 1999. Community Conservation and the Future of Africa's Wildlife. Conservation Biology 13  (4):  726-734.
- Harkness, J. 1998. Recent Trends in Forestry and Conservation of Biodiversity in China. Chiria Quarterly 156: 911-934.
- He, G. Q. 1999. Essentials of  My Anthropological Survey in the Forest of Shimentai Nature Reserve. Unpublished field notes.
- Herrold, M. 1999. The Cranes of Caohai and Other Incidents of  Fieldwork in Southwestern China. Geographical  Review 89 (3): 44c-448.
- IUCN [International Union for the Conservation of Nature]. 1999. Threats to Forest Protected Areas: A  Summary of zo Coicntries  Girried oict  in Association  with  the  World Commission on Protected Areas. Report for the World  Bank Alliance for Forest Conservation and Sustainable Use. [ http:// ~~.iucn.org/themes/forests/protectedareas/threatstoforestprotectedareas.pdf] .
- Kellert, S. R.,  J.  N.  Mehta, S. A. Ebbin,  and  L.  L.  Lichtenfeld. 2000. Community Natural  Resource Management: Promise, Rhetoric, and Reality. Society arid Natural Resources 13 ( 8 ) : 705-715.
- Kemf, E. 1993. Indigenous Peoples and Protected Areas: The Law of Mother Earth. London: Earthscan. Lee, C. B. 1939. Local History, Social Organization and Warfare. Lirignan Sciencelournall8 (3):  357-369. Lewis, C. D., ed. 1996. Managing Conflicts in Protected Areas. Gland, Switzerland: IUCN.
- Li, Q.  Y.,  and G. E.  Li, eds. 1994. Yiiigde I.inye Shi (History of Forestry in Yingde). Unpublished  manuscript.
- Liu, H. M., Z. F.  Xu, Y.  K.  Xu, and J. X. Wang. 2002. Practice of  Conserving Plant  Diversity through Traditional  Beliefs: A Case Study in Xishuangbanna, Southwest China. Biodiversity and Conservation 11 (4):  705-713.
- Liu, J.  G., M. Linderman, Z. Y.   Ouyang, L. An, J.  Yang, and H. M. Zhang. 2001. Ecological  Degradation in Protected Areas: The Case of Wolong Nature Reserve for Giant Pandas. Science 292 (5514):  98-101.
- Liu, J.  L.,  and E. Morrison. 1999. Forest  Policy Experiments in a 'Planned Market Economy,' China. In Policy That Works for Forests and People: Overview Report, edited by J.  Mayers and S. C. Bass, 131-136. Policy That Works for Forests and People, No. 7. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
- McNeely, J.  A. 1993. Parks for Life: Report of  the Wh World Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas, 10--21 February 1992. Gland, Switzerland: World Conservation Union in Collaboration with the World Wide Fund for Nature.
- Mehta, J.  N.,  and S. Kellert. 1998. Local Attitudes toward  Community-Based Conservation  Policy and Programmes in Nepal: A Case Study in the Makalu-Barun Conservation Area. Environmental Conservation 25 (4):  320-333.
- Menzies, N. K. 1994. Forest and Larid Management in Imperial China. New York St. Martin's Press. Richardson, S. D. 1990. Forests  and  Forestry  in  China: Changing Patterns of Resource Development. Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
- Scott, P . 1998. From Conflict to  Collaboration: People  arid  Forests  at  Moictit  Elgon,  Uganda. Nairobi: IUCN Eastern Africa Regional Office.
- Utting,  P . 1993. Trees, People and Power: Social Dimensions of Deforestation and Forest  Protection in Centrnl America. London: Earthscan.
- Wells, M., and K.  Brandon. 1992. People and Parks: Linking  Protected  Areas Management  with Local Communities. Washington,  D.C.:  World  Bank / World Wildlife  Fund / U.S.  Agency for International Development.
- Wen, Y.  L.,  H. Yin, and L.  L. Wu. 1998. Shengwu Duoyangxing Baohu Yu  Shequ Fazhan (Biodiversity Conservation and Community Development). China Envirotinierit Newspaper, 29 October, 3.
- Woon, Y.  F. 1999. Labor  Migration  in  the 1990s: Homeward Orientation of Migrants in the  Pearl River Delta Region and Its Implication for Interior China. Modern China 25  (4):  475-512.
- YSGAJ [Yingde Shi Gong An Ju (Yingde Public Security Bureau)]. 1999. Huiyi Jianbao (Summary of the Meeting on z June).  Guangdong, China. Unpublished government document.
- YSRZ [Yingde Shi Renmin Zhengfu (Yingde People's Government)]. 1998. Guanyu Nijian Shimentai Shengji Ziran Baohu Qu Kexingxing Yanjiu Baogao (Feasibility Report on the Creation of Shimentai Province-Rank  Nature Reserve). Guangdong, China. Unpublished report.
- Zhang, J. Q., ed. 1997. Gicnngdong Ziran Baohu Qu (Nature Reserves in Guangdong). Guangzhou, China: Guangdong Tourism Press.
- Zube, E.  H.,  and  M. Busch. 1990. Park-People  Relationship:  An  International  Review. Landscape 15 Urban Planning 19: ( 2 ) 117-131.