<!-- image -->

## Geographical Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utgr20

## THE EMERGING MOUNTAIN IMAGINARY OF THE GALICIAN HIGHLANDS: A NEW NATIONAL LANDSCAPE IN AN ERA OF GLOBALIZATION?

Valerià Paül &amp; Juan-M. Trillo-Santamaría

To cite this article: Valerià Paül &amp; Juan-M. Trillo-Santamaría (2021): THE EMERGING MOUNTAIN IMAGINARY OF THE GALICIAN HIGHLANDS: A NEW NATIONAL LANDSCAPE IN AN ERA OF GLOBALIZATION?, Geographical Review, DOI: 10.1080/00167428.2021.1897812

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00167428.2021.1897812

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 15 Apr 2021.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 84

View related articles

View Crossmark data

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## THE EMERGING MOUNTAIN IMAGINARY OF THE GALICIAN HIGHLANDS: A NEW NATIONAL LANDSCAPE IN AN ERA OF GLOBALIZATION?

VALERIÀ PAÜL and JUAN-M. TRILLO-SANTAMARÍA

ABSTRACT.  Mountains  have  been  the  object  of  an  intense  elaboration  of  national imaginaries.  There  is  a  widespread  perception  of  Galicia  as  a  rural  and  coastal country  based  on  agricultural  and  seaside  landscapes,  with  mountains  being  largely ignored.  However,  a  production  of  local  narratives  around  the  Trevinca  Massif  has recently  taken  place,  which  has  become  quite  widespread,  with  an  emerging  mountain  landscape  imaginary  of  its  own  around  the  notion  of  the  Galician  Highlands. This  paper  discusses  these  developments  in  the  context  of  both  the  changing imaginaries  of  mountains  in  Western  cultures  and  the  different  Galician  landscape imaginaries.  The  research  was  carried  out  by  means  of  semistructured  interviewing, leading toward obtaining three narratives elaborated from semiotic clustering. These results allow us to infer that global forces, in particular tourism and promotion, have been essential for explaining the emergence and spread of the Galician Highlands as a  socio-spatial  imaginary.  Another  conclusion  is  the  relevance  of  the  disputed conception  of  'natural  borders'  coinciding  with  mountains  in  the  case-study  area. Keywords:  Galician  Highlands,  globalization,  mountain,  nationalism,  socio-spatial imaginary.

C ertain mountains hold a deep national meaning for the respective countries they are located in (Nogué and Vicente 2004 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ; Bernbaum  and  Price 2013 ;  Della  Dora 2016 ;  Herb 2018 ).  A  case  in  point  is  Japan, quintessentially linked with Mount Fuji, customarily shown with sea waves, cherry trees, and traditional architecture, but nowadays these icons have been replaced by other representations, such as manga and even the shinkansen. In the current era of globalization, these imaginaries are quite commonly  projected abroad, attaining  worldwide  significance.  Bernard  Debarbieux  ( 2004 )  proposed  a framework  regarding  spatial  imaginaries  attached  to  mountains  in  Western countries 1 that was broadened, gaining a planetwide dimension, by Debarbieux and Gilles Rudaz ( 2010 ). In this model, the national imaginary of mountains is commonly expected. However, other imaginaries are also identified, including global environmentalism and internationalism, which have gained momentum throughout  the  twentieth  century.  By  examining  a  case  study  where  the mountain  imaginary  is  contemporarily  emerging,  we  can  discover  if  the national aspect remains significant or assert that, currently, the social construction of mountains bears witness to other dimensions.

VALERIÀ  PAÜL,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Santiago  de  Compostela,  Praza  da Universidade, 1 ,  Santiago  de  Compostela, 15703 ,  Galicia,  Spain;  [v.paul.carril@usc.gal].  JUAN-M. TRILLO-SANTAMARÍA,  Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Santiago  de  Compostela,  Praza  da Universidade, 1 ,  Santiago de Compostela, 15703 ,  Galicia, Spain; [juanmanuel.trillo@usc.es].

2

FIG. 1 -Location map of Galicia. Source: Base map from https://www.ign.es/, authors' elaboration.

<!-- image -->

The territory in focus is Galicia (Figure 1 ), whose national character is based on  its  own  language,  culture,  and  sense  of  belonging,  resulting  in  a  strong identity.  Galicia  is  constitutionally  considered  a  nationality,  euphemism  for nation,  which  has  experienced  devolution  within  Spain  since  the  late 1970 s.  As outlined  below,  mountain  landscapes  in  Galicia  have  been  largely  ignored  and the national landscape imaginaries have been constructed with other geographical bases in mind. However, throughout the first two decades of the twenty-first century,  a  new  landscape  discourse  has  emerged  in  the  Trevinca  Massif  (the highest  peak  of  the  nation  being  Trevinca  at 2127 m).  Obviously,  these  mountains,  the  highest  ones  in  Galicia,  have  always  been  there,  but  they  have  only attained significance in the socio-spatial discourses about Galicia since the 2000 s, approximately.  In  this  process  of  emergent  mountain  imaginary,  the  development and extension of the category of the 'Galician Highlands' ( Terras Altas de Galicia in  Galician)  has  certainly  been  a  milestone.  The  studied  region  was indeed  the  'objective'  Galician  highlands-with  a  significant  land  area  of  over 1 , 800 m-but no one had used this concept before.

Accordingly,  the  recent  local  narratives  about  mountains,  developed  in  the Trevinca Massif, are analyzed to discern whether these respond to the

construction of a national landscape and/or whether they are linked with global processes. Debarbieux's ( 2019 ) conceptualization of social imaginaries of space is the  overall  foundation  for  such  an  attempt;  moreover,  and  more  precisely,  the specific  theorizations  on  mountains  constituting  a  socially  framed  spatial  category  (see  Debarbieux 2004 ;  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  Della  Dora 2016 )  and on landscapes becoming a national discourse (for example, Nogué and Vicente 2004 ;  Herb 2018 )  will  be  here  addressed.  More  significantly,  this  research  does not focus on these mountains per se, but on the emergent imaginaries associated with them.

The paper begins by building a theoretical framework through an overview of  the  changing  imaginaries  of  mountains  in  Western  cultures  and  by  revising the  construction  of  national  landscape  imaginaries  in  Galicia,  followed  by  the presentation of the case-study area. The next section outlines how the empirical analysis  has  been  carried  out.  The  paper  then  goes  on  to  analyze  the  spatial narratives  obtained  from  qualitative  interviewing  through  analytical  coding. A discussion is provided in order to contrast these results in light of the overall evolution of Western mountain imaginaries and taking into account the different Galician national landscape imaginaries.

## THE  EVOLVING  WESTERN  IMAGINARIES  OF  MOUNTAINS

Mountains are widely understood as physical elements that are identifiable in the landscape. However, this discernment is not standardized, as the perception of what a mountain is differs among communities. Some imperceptible hills can be regarded  as  relevant  mountains  nearby,  while  orographic  massifs,  defined  as mountainous by geographers and geologists, might not be conceived as such by the  people  living  within  or  nearby-for  a  wider  discussion  in  this  respect,  see Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 )  and Veronica Della Dora ( 2016 ).  Indeed, classical geographers  such  as  Roderick  Peattie  stated,  in  the 1930 s,  that  mountains  can only be defined by making use of 'the imagination of the people who live within their shadow' (Byers et al. 2013 , 2 ).

Hence, in regards to mountains, the focus here is on the 'various conceptions [that]  have  flourished  one  after  the  other,  each  one  being  a  combination  of patterns of  perception,  visions  of  the  world,  projects  of  knowledge  and  action' (Debarbieux 2004 , 404 ).  These  successive  imaginaries  find  their  correlate  in different  social,  political,  historical,  and  cultural  contexts.  They  cannot  all  be read  as  mutually  exclusive,  but  interwoven,  overlapping,  and  in  dialogue  with each other, in a process that is not always linear.

THE  'INVENTION  OF  THE  MOUNTAIN': BETWEEN  ENLIGHTENMENT  AND  ROMANTICISM-AND NATIONALISMS

The  critical  change  in  the  Western  perception  of  mountains  took  place  in  the eighteenth  century,  particularly  in  the  Alps,  moving  from  being  perceived  as

4

a  diabolic  image  based  on  Christian  conceptions-see  Philippe  Joutard  ( 1986 ), William Cronon ( 1995 ), and Della Dora ( 2016 )-to an idyllic and, as such, more sympathetic vision. This process has been coined by Eduardo Martínez de Pisón and Sebastián Álvaro ( 2002 , 43 ) and Isabelle Sacareau ( 2003 , 3 ) as 'the invention of  the  mountain,'  an  expression  that  was  already  used  by  Joutard  ( 1986 )  when specifically  referring  to  'the  invention  of  Mont  Blanc.'  This  shift  can  be explained  by  the  Enlightenment;  science  was  considered  central  to  human existence and, by so doing, there was a need to properly conceptualize, objectivize, and define reality. In this sense, Western academics were keen to know the specific location of the mountains and fully study their features, in an attempt to map the world through systematic explorations.

In parallel  to  the  rational  interest  in  the  mountains,  a  significant  emotional and  sensitive  reconfiguration  also  took  place.  This  is  made  evident  by,  for instance,  the  increasing  number  of  books  published  in  the  eighteenth  century devoted  to  mountains.  They  were  described  as  magnificent  places  and  as  the quintessence  of  natural  beauty.  A  literary  milestone  is La  Nouvelle  Héloïse by Jean-Jacques Rousseau ( 1761 ), in which the Alps were the 'natural sanctuary' of Europe (Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro 2002 , 39 )  under a 'moral and aesthetic' categorization (Debarbieux 2004 , 400 ). This book was the origin of the taste for mountains in Europe (Bernbaum and Price 2013 ).

Horace-Bénédict  de  Saussure's  ascent  of  Mont  Blanc  in 1787 ,  preceded one year earlier by Jacques Balmat and Michel Paccard, is pivotal for mountaineering,  not  only  in  the  Alps  but  also  in  the  world;  motivated  by  science  and adventure,  Saussure's  feat  gave  rise  to  mountaineering  (Joutard 1986 ;  Martínez de  Pisón  and  Álvaro 2002 ).  Thanks  to  this  Alpine  seminal  moment,  the  Alps have become  the 'model' and 'prototype' for mountains in the world (Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 , 40 -42 ).  Alpinism  has  a  very  intense  history  led by  Alpine  Clubs  in  many  countries,  whose  members  have  climbed  the  outstanding  mountains  of  the  world  throughout  the  twentieth  century  (Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro 2002 ).

Romanticism  contributed  with  new  meanings  for  mountains  in  Western cultures  (Short 1991 ),  causing  a  multiplication  of  artistic  representations  of mountains,  namely  the  Alps,  including  different  types  of  texts  (such  as  guidebooks,  novels,  and  poetry),  music,  paintings,  lithography  printings,  the  first photographs, and even souvenirs (for instance, porcelain dishes).  This  imagery became  extremely  popular  and  available  to  a  wider  public  in  the  nineteenth century (Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro 2002 ; Nogué  and  Vicente 2004 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Della Dora 2016 ).

Joan  Nogué  and  Joan  Vicente  ( 2004 )  analyze  how  certain  mountainous landscapes have become symbols of nationalisms, including not only well established nation-states (for example, the role attributed to the Alps in Switzerland), but  also  new  independent  countries  (for  example,  Mount  Kosciuszko  and,  in

general,  the  Australian  Alps  for  Australia)  and  stateless  nations  (such  as  the Pyrenees  for  Catalonia).  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz  ( 2010 )  include  the  particular perception  of  mountain  people  within  the  national  narratives  in  this  wave  of nationalisms.  These  are  always  politically  driven  discourses,  attached  either  to negative (savage, violent, belligerent . . .) or positive (tough, courageous, loyal . . .) values.  According  to  Guntram  Henrik  Herb  ( 2018 ),  nationalism  endows  these landscapes and the people inhabiting them with such connotations because they are  conceived  as  the  origin  of  the  nation,  as  well  as  entailing  a  connection between the allegedly unspoiled nature with the unspoiled national soul.

Mountains were attributed an important role as 'natural borders' under the Western nationalist conception of mountains in the nineteenth century (Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Fall 2010 ). The origin of this notion can be traced back  to  Cardinal  Richelieu's  attempt  to  fix  the  French  borders  coinciding  with the Pyrenees and the Alps in the seventeenth century (Sahlins 1990 ).

## NATURAL  AND  ENVIRONMENTAL  VIEWS  ON  THE  MOUNTAINS

Liberal  nation-states  have  developed  nature-protection  policies  in  mountain  areas since the nineteenth century (Price and Kohler 2013 ). The designations of Yellowstone and Yosemite as parks in the second half of that century are widely seen as milestones of this policy. However, other achievements can be noted; consider, for instance, the case of forestry policies, such as compulsory afforestation affecting significant parts of mountain areas  in  the  Alps  (Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  Cunha  and  Price 2013 ). These designations evidence that the policies were not really based on environmental motives-as  could  be  contemporarily  misunderstood-but  largely  responded  to nationalist and protourism intentions, through a particular construction of the notion of wilderness in the United States (Short 1991 ; Cronon 1995 ; Depraz 2008 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ; Woods 2011 ; Debarbieux 2019 ).

In  any  case,  national  parks  as  planning  devices  were  rapidly  applied  to several  mountains  across  the  globe.  Indeed,  other  designations  soon  emerged in the early twentieth century (natural monuments, forest reserves, and the like), leading  to  a  correlation  of  mountains  and  protection  (Price  and  Kohler 2013 ; Arpin and Cosson 2015 ).  Environmentalism has increasingly shaped mountains, especially  since  the  early 1970 s,  when  the  United  Nations  organized  the  first major  conference  on  international  environmental  issues  in  Stockholm  in 1972 . This  conference  marked  a  turning  point  in  the  development  of  environmental policies.  In  short,  mountains  are  often  conceived  as  'emblematic  landscapes [extracted] from artificialisation and modernization' (Debarbieux 2004 , 402 ).

## MODERNIST  IMAGINARIES:  RESOURCES  AND  DEVELOPMENT

Throughout  the  twentieth  century,  mountains  have  also  been  seen  as  areas enduring specific problems, such as depopulation and economic decline, increasingly  earmarked  for  explicit  policies  delivered  by  the  respective  nation-states.

6

The  modernist  paradigm  initially  arrived  through  dams  built  for  obtaining hydroelectricity  and  selective  manufacturing  development  (dependent  on  the availability of natural resources), commonly attached to infrastructures of access (Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  Price  and  Kohler 2013 ).  Tourism  was  already present  in  mountains  from  the  nineteenth  century,  but  its  systematic  use  for the purposes of economic growth took place throughout the twentieth century. Nowadays,  tourism  in  mountain  areas  ranges  from  Alpinist  hikers  who  value solitude  to  mass  tourism  and  amenity  migrants  (Nepal  and  Chipeniuk 2005 ; Price  and  Kohler 2013 ).  In  many  countries,  specific  aids  for  mountain  farming have also been set up in order to sustain declining farms in the second half of the twentieth  century  (Majoral 1997 ;  Pujadas  and  Font 1998 ;  Debarbieux 2004 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ).

Since  the 1960 s,  regional  and/or  local  policies,  agencies,  and  initiatives for  mountain  regions  have  multiplied  and,  contrary  to  previous  sectoral approaches,  these  spatial  devices  envisage  integral  mountain  development (Majoral 1997 ;  Pujadas  and  Font 1998 ;  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  Price and Kohler 2013 ).  In  this  sense,  many mountains have been the object of an accelerated commodification through trademarks and labels promoting their development since the late twentieth century (Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ).  In  the  case  of  the  European  Communities  (now  the  EU), devices  such  as  protected  food  designations  and  local  action  groups  under the  LEADER  initiative, 2 launched  in  the  early 1990 s,  have  repeatedly  made use  of  mountain  narratives  to  sustain  their  identity,  basically  in  economic terms,  with  inconclusive  results  (Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  McMorran et  al. 2015 ).

## THE  'INTERNATIONALIZATION  OF  MOUNTAINS'

Over  the  past  few  decades,  mountains  have  increasingly  been  conceived  as meaningful at a planet level, rather than at a country level. In this regard, several global initiatives have been significant since the 1970 s,  such as the Man and the Biosphere  Program  under  the  auspices  of  UNESCO,  leading,  in  turn,  to  the celebration  of  the  International  Year  of  Mountains  in 2002 (Debarbieux  and Rudaz 2010 ; Price and Kohler 2013 ). Since the early 2000 s, civil society initiatives have envisaged avoiding formal politics, such as the World Mountain Forum at the global level or, at the regional level, the Yellowstone to Yukon Conservation Initiative, founded in 1997 (Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Chester 2015 ).

A specific instance is the EU. In the context of the EU integration (including cross-border initiatives), different forms of regional institutionalization of international mountains have taken place (Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Balsiger and Nahrath 2015 ;  Debarbieux et al. 2015 ). The Alpine Region, the Pyrenees, and the Carpathian Range, to name a few, have been the object of intense construction of transnational mountain devices.

## GALICIAN  NATIONAL  LANDSCAPE  IMAGINARIES

According  to  Justo  Beramendi  ( 2007 ),  Galician  nationalism  dates  back  to  the mid-nineteenth  century,  initially  by  asserting  the  ethnical  identity  of  Galicianamely by means of a rebirth of the poetry and prose written in Galician, almost absent  in  formal  literature  since  the  Middle  Ages-and  the  need  to  politically reframe the Spanish state in order to establish a new political status for Galicia. In the early twentieth century, the national character of Galicia becomes overtly acknowledged  and  the  ideological  quest  for  the  political  institutionalization  of Galicia gains momentum, including autonomist, federal, self-determination, and secessionist claims.

Landscape  imaginaries  have  been  present  since  the  early  variations  of Galician  nationalism.  Federico  López  Silvestre  ( 2004 , 492 )  remarks  on  the relevance of the first time the word 'landscape' is written in Galician: it is in the prologue of Cantares gallegos ('Galician songs') by Rosalía de Castro ( 1863 ), which is widely seen as a seminal book of contemporary Galicia. Hence, 'landscape' acts as a cultural and social-progressively, also political-discourse for rooting the Galician identity and sustaining the (national) self-esteem and selfidentification of the Galician people. This is done by considering the Galician landscape as being similar to prestigious landscapes, such as the Swiss onesGalicia  becomes,  quite  often,  the  'Spanish  Switzerland'-and  contrasting  it with  the  (alleged)  core  Spanish  landscape  represented  by  Castile.  Rosalía  de Castro gave birth to a Galician landscape understood as green, beautiful, rural, agricultural,  maternal,  gentle,  and  full  of  farmers,  broadly  recognized  in  these terms by Galician society in the following decades (López Sández 2008 ; Murado 2008 ).

Helena Miguélez-Carballeira ( 2014 )  argues that this canonical imaginary has been manipulated for decades because the perception of the landscape as feminine has gradually been linked with the notions of docility, submissiveness, and passivity.  This  move  entails  obvious  political  correlates  that  are  used,  for instance,  by  Spanish  institutions  to  tamper  Rosalía  de  Castro's  original  voice into a more manageable vision of what Galicia is meant to be. In any case, the Galician  landscape  ideal  is  deeply  rooted  in  Rosalía  de  Castro's  construction, privileging this self-representation of Galicia as a fertile garden.

Miguel  Anxo  Mato  ( 1998 ),  María  López  Sández  ( 2008 ),  and  Miguel-Anxo Murado  ( 2008 )  show  that  other  Galician  writers  and  historians  had  already contended  with  this  dominant  Galician  landscape  since  the  mid-nineteenth century.  This  opposed  landscape  narrative  is  characterized  by  countermotives, such as masculinity and wilderness; instead of farmers, it is inhabited by epical warriors  and  mythical  heroes;  rather  than  cows  and  corn  (two  archetypical elements  of  the  Galician  landscape  derived  from  de  Castro's  works),  the  landscape is full of wild flora and fauna. Importantly, this narrative favors the coastal landscapes of Galicia with cliffs and creates a link with other Celtic and Atlantic

8

European  nations.  This  is  a  landscape  narrative  that  has  had  a  limited  effect compared  to  the  first,  and  main,  one.  Nevertheless,  it  is  relevant  in  order  to grasp Galician nationalist landscaping.

Since at least the 1930 s,  Galicia has begun to be customized from the Spanish national perspective,  especially  for  tourism  marketing  purposes.  This  image focuses  on  the  southwestern  Galician  coastal  area,  with  beaches  located  on  the shore of wide rías (inlets), accessible and ready to be visited by tourists, quite often depicted in sunny summers. This is an exogenous landscape vision that is opposed by  Galician  nationalist  cultural  elites  (Paül 2019 ).  However,  it  has  been  highly influential and widely adopted in Galicia as a sort of self-representation, converging and merging with the first landscape narrative. Interestingly, such a vision has had a direct effect on the protected natural areas policy, with the first designations in the 1930 s affecting coastal areas and a persisting trend to designate coastal lands as  protected  (including  the  only  national  park  designated  in  Galicia:  Atlantic Islands  of  Galicia).  Additionally,  the  Spanish  tourism  marketing-as  well  as  the one developed in Galicia since devolution in the 1980 s-has repeatedly promoted Galician  coastlands  as  a  destination,  in  contrast  to  inland  areas  that  were  not marketed  until  the 1990 s,  by  means  of  the  increasing  attention  paid  to  rural tourism  and  the  Way  of  Saint  James  (Lois  et  al. 2015 ;  Santos  and  TrilloSantamaría 2017 ).

The  mountains  located  in  inland  Galicia,  revealingly,  have  been  largely blotted  out  from  this  genealogy  of  landscape  imaginaries.  Surprisingly,  neither the  Galician  nor  the  Spanish  nationalist  vision  has  generated  a  mountainous landscape imaginary in Galicia, an awkward absence in itself given the relevance of mountain landscapes in Western nations, as suggested above. However, this is not  to  say  that  there  is  no  mention  of  mountains  (for  instance,  in  the  artistic domain, mainly in literature), but they are particular and unstructured. A case in point is the lack of mountaineering in Galicia, in contrast with Spain as a whole, particularly  in  Madrid,  and  with  Catalonia  and  the  Basque  Country,  the  other two  main  stateless  nations  within  contemporary  Spain,  with  a  long  history  of very active mountaineering clubs (Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro 2002 ), although there  are  some  humble  exceptions  that  will  be  partially  considered  in  the  next section. To sum up, the mountainous landscape is expected in Western nations but  Galicia  has  not  followed  this  pattern  until  quite  recently.  This  paper  will consider when and how this emergence has taken place.

## THE  TREVINCA  MASSIF

A vast region of more than 850 km 2 extends around the Trevinca peak without any settlements. The hamlet nearest to the peak, Ponte, is 8 km away as the crow flies,  but  this  is  an  exception  given  that  most  of  the  hamlets  are  located  more than 15 km from  the  peak,  generating  an  empty  region  from  a  demographical perspective. This is due to the climate, which is extremely cold in winter and the

FIG. 2 -The Trevinca peak in the background, seen from the south-east in late winter: most of the pastures are covered by snow. Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 23 / 3 / 2016 ).

<!-- image -->

region is covered by snow for several months (Figure 2 ).  Inhabitants have only settled  at  lower  altitudes.  The  highest  hamlet  in  Galicia  is  Cepedelo  ( 1340 m), more  than 20 km  from  the  Trevinca  summit;  above  this  altitude,  permanent population  has  been  historically  unmanageable.  The  area  is  extremely  sloping, making mobility difficult; the 8 km from Ponte to the peak have an elevational gradient of more than 1000 m.

The  municipalities 3 in  this  massif  have  been  depopulated  over  the  last century:  demographics peaked in the 1930 Census, with 30 , 558 inhabitants,  and nowadays the population living therein is 7 , 721 ( 2019 )  (Figure 3 ).  Overall,  there has  been  a 75 percent  drop  in 89 years.  The  most  dramatic  decrease  has  been experienced in the municipality of A Veiga, given that the population registered in 2019 was only 11 percent of the figure in 1930 ;  indeed, there are currently 889 inhabitants distributed among 29 different hamlets, some of them with only five or seven inhabitants (Figure 3 ).

From a landscape-history perspective, these lands have been devoted to seasonal  pastures  at  least  since  the  Middle  Ages,  as  is  the  case  with  many  other mountains (Cunha and Price 2013 ). During summer, thousands of cows and sheep grazed  the  mountains,  enduring  the  consequences  associated  with  wolves  and other  feral  animals  (Figure 4 ).  During  the  snowy  season,  the  livestock  were sheltered  in  the  hamlets  or,  by  means  of  transhumance  routes,  transported hundreds of kilometers away. These activities required burning to keep the landscape clear of trees. These practices disappeared throughout the second half of the

10

FIG. 3 -Population variation ( 1850 -2019 ) in the municipalities with part of their territory in the Trevinca Massif. Source: www.ine.es, authors' elaboration.

<!-- image -->

FIG. 4 -A high valley  (an  altitude  of 1 , 600 m)  in  the  middle  of  the  Serra  Calva  range,  with stone walls for fencing in the livestock. Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 22 / 7 / 2017 ).

<!-- image -->

twentieth century and currently only some sporadic groups of cows are recorded as grazing in summer (Figure 4 ). However, even now all the land above 1400 m is deforested.  In  fact,  one  of  the  main  ranges  is  named  Serra  Calva-'Swidden Range'-proof of this historical practice (Figures 4 and 5 ).

In  terms  of  physical  geography,  the  massif  is  centered  on  the  Trevinca  peak. From  this nucleus, several ranges extend toward disperse cardinal points (Figure 5 ).  During the recent ice age, there was an icefield located in this nucleus from which different glaciers spilled down into valleys, looking like tongues. The erosion caused by these valley glaciers created glacial lakes, including the biggest one on the Iberian Peninsula, Sanabria Lake, which is dammed by a moraine.

The fact that these are the highest lands in Galicia was unclear for centuries. Trevinca  is  first  quoted  in  a  document  by  the  German  geologist  Guillermo Schulz  ( 1835 , 7 ),  who  declared  that  'I  have  not  figured  out  the  heights  of  the different  ranges  [. . .]  but  in  general  I  can  say  that  the  ranges  in  Galicia  do  not attain  an  extraordinary  elevation  [. . .].  Only  Ancares  and  Trevinca  [. . .]  retain some  snow  until  mid-summer'  (our  translation).  Significantly,  Schulz  was dubious about the highest lands in Galicia  (Ancares does not  reach 2000 m in height).  Another  foreigner,  also  working  in  mining,  was  possibly  the  first  to measure the height of Trevinca in the early 1900 s-the Belgian engineer Edgar d'Hoore,  who  managed  the  rich  wolfram  mines  of  the  region.  He  is  the  first recorded  mountaineer  in  the  area  and  was  known  by  Gonzalo  Gurriarán,  the founder of the first hiking club in Galicia in 1944 (Gurriarán 2005 ).

The context in which mountaineering was born in Galicia in general, and in the Trevinca Massif in particular, is ambiguous. The activities began in the 1940 s, the first decade of the Franco dictatorship, which repressed Galician culture, language, and identity. Although Gurriarán tried to involve the Galician elites, the hiking club was a  modest  one.  There  were  continuous  plans  to  open  a  ski  resort,  which  never materialized  (Paül  et  al. 2019 ).  Some  buildings  in  Fonte  da  Cova  are  the  result  of this pursuit (Figure 6 ). Additionally, the few Galician cultural activists who were active during  Franco's  dictatorship  were  not  keen  on  mountaineering,  as  the  geographer Ramón Otero Pedrayo evidences; a well-known Galician nationalist, he was repeatedly invited to the mountains by Gurriarán in the 1940 s50 s but he never went there, possibly because he did not feel that they matched his landscape imaginary, much dependent on de Castro's canon (Paül 2019 ), as previously noted.

However, and despite the harsh context of Franco's dictatorship, in 1953 Gurriarán led a group to protest against the project to build an artificial dam on the Sanabria Lake moraine that would have destroyed the glacier-born landscape (Gurriarán 2005 ). Fortunately,  the  dam  was  never  built  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  a  process  to designate it a protected area. Eventually, the 'Sanabria Lake and surroundings' area was designated a natural park in 1978 by the Spanish government, covering part of the municipality of Galende (further extended to a wider area in 1990 , and again in 2017 ; Figure 5 ).

12

FIG. 5 -Regional map showing the toponyms mentioned in the text. Source: Base map from https://www.ign.es/, authors' elaboration.

<!-- image -->

FIG. 6 -The Fonte da Cova hotel built in the 1970 s that was supposed to be the center of a ski resort. Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 27 / 5 / 2016 ).

<!-- image -->

Although  the  small  group  of  mountaineers'  perception  of  landscape  understood Sanabria Lake to be the terminal moraine of the ancient glacier originated in the Trevinca peak-thus part of the Trevinca Massif-in the 1950 s, the designated park  has  been  centered  on  the  lake  itself  since  the 1970 s.  In  the  late 1970 s,  after Franco's  death,  autonomous  regions  were  created  in  Spain.  Designating  and managing protected areas became a competence of these devolved regions. Thus, the natural park was transferred to the Castile and Leon Autonomous Region, the Trevinca  massif  being  split  between  Galician  territory  (western  half)  and  Leon territory  (eastern  half)  (Figure 5 ).  While  in  Galicia  these  mountains  have  not attracted  attention,  in  the  natural  park  counterpart,  tourism  development  has escalated.  The  Galician  side  was  unprotected  until  the  EU  impelled  local  authorities to designate areas as part of the Natura 2000 network. 4 Under this initiative, the  Galician  government  designated  a  Site  of  Community  Importance  (SCI) named  Trevinca,  which  was  converted  into  a  Special  Area  of  Conservation (SAC) in 2014 (Figure 5 ), with substantially weaker protection than a natural park.

## METHODOLOGICAL  CONSIDERATIONS

Following  the  conceptualization  carried  out  above,  'mountain  as  a  category  is not a ready-made resource, it has to be constructed' (Arpin and Cosson 2015 , 63 ) as 'a social [. . .] category' (Debarbieux 2004 , 404 ). Rather than looking into this construction by examining materials such as texts or maps (see Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ; Della Dora 2016 ), our approach favors interviewing. This is because José Ignacio Ruiz Olabuénaga ( 1999 )  understands that social constructivism has to be studied by means of this research technique.

Interviewees were selected due to having participated in 'attribut[ing]' new 'meanings' (Valentine 2005 , 111 )  to  the area. Additionally, in these interviews it was  essential  to  comprehend  'the  processes  which  operate  in  particular  social contexts' (Valentine 2005 , 111 ) in order to gain a social dimension beyond mere personal  considerations.  The  reader  must  account  for  the  fact  that  one  of  the authors  of  the  paper  has  been  mountaineering  in  the  region,  as  well  as  being a  member of  a  local  hikers'  club,  for  more  than  two  decades,  and  the  involvement of them both in developing the contents of a visitors' center for the region inaugurated  in 2017 ,  as  reflecting  a  bias.  On  the  other  hand,  this  situation  has facilitated easy access to several interviewees. Additionally, snowballing has been practiced to recruit other informants (Valentine 2005 ). It is essential to point out that  interviewing  does  not  seek  representativeness  (Ruiz  Olabuénaga 1999 ; Valentine 2005 ).

Thirty-six in-person interviews were conducted from February to April 2017 ; twenty-nine of them are considered meaningful for this paper. Their profiles are challenging  as  most  have  various  roles,  but  they  can  be  clustered  as  follows: seven activists (mountaineers, environmentalists, and such); seven entrepreneurs (mostly  in  tourism,  but  not  exclusively);  six  local  politicians  (five  mayors  and

14

one  deputy  mayor);  four  civil  servants  working  in  local  governments,  and  five nature managers (managing the natural park or the SAC). We tried to include stakeholders from the nine municipalities of the area (Figure 5 ), 16 in Galicia and 13 in Castile and Leon. In eight cases they do not live therein but nearby or they have political/administrative roles with a direct impact on the area. In order to guarantee anonymity, real names have been omitted and substituted by invented names, occasionally changing the genders. Most of these interviews have already been  interpreted,  in  a  paper  solely  focused  on  tourism,  by  Valerià  Paül  et  al. ( 2019 ).

A semistructured interviewing schedule was created following Ruiz Olabuénaga's ( 1999 ), Rob  Kitchin and Nicholas J. Tate's ( 2000 ), and Gill Valentine's  ( 2005 )  conventions.  The  words  'mountain(s)'  and  'Trevinca'  were deliberately  avoided  to  encourage  participants  to  freely  refer  to  these  concepts (Cameron 2016 ). Through 25 -30 questions phrased as 'Tell me about', four themes were embraced:

- perceptions of the region;
- identification of people, institutions, organizations, and such working in the region, to detect actors and networks;
- assessment of the role played by the public sector, particularly related to policies impacting and promoting the region; and
- presence  of  an  administrative  limit  between  Galicia  and  Castile  and Leon,  trying  to  clarify  to  what  extent  there  might  be  a  divergence between both sides of the border.

The  interviews  lasted  approximately  one  hour  and,  with  permission,  were recorded  and  transcribed.  This  material  has  been  analyzed  by  means  of  open coding, both emic and etic (Crang 2005 ;  Cope 2016 ).  These  codes  are  the  basis for  the  results  section  of  this  paper,  which  are  structured  into  three  narratives obtained from semiotic clustering, carried out according to Mike Crang ( 2005 ). The quotes are our translation.

## RESULTS

The  narratives  are  an  interpretation  of  a  consistent  set  of  analytical  codes regarding  the  Trevinca  massif.  Interviewees  are  not  grouped  by  narratives because  one  interviewee  may  refer  to  codes  attributed  to  different  narratives. From a spatial perspective, we have inferred that each narrative has taken shape on particular  hiking  trails,  embracing  specific  spatial  ways  of  conceiving,  planning, and managing them (Figure 7 ).

FIG. 7 -Hiking trails associated with each narrative. Source: Base map from https://www.ign.es/, authors' elaboration.

<!-- image -->

WILDERNESS  HIGHLANDS  TO  BE  MOUNTAINEERED  AND  DESERVING  INTEGRAL  PROTECTION

The first narrative is based on the understanding of these mountains as areas of wilderness, with limited human intervention.

It  is  an  isolated  area,  without roads, [. . .] and, above all, undoubtedly for me, still pristine. [. . .]  I  walk  every  day  [. . .]  and  for  me  it  is  like  seeing  a  garden  [Elvia].

I would define the area as the last natural paradise [. . .]. Because there are some areas that are practically inaccessible, that still hold the essence of the mountain nature [Xoel].

These mountains are also seen as the perfect setting for achieving solitude and personal introspection.

The highlands, mountainous, are spectacular. They amaze me. [. . .] The other day I was in [an upper valley], I stopped walking . . . and I couldn't hear anything at all: simply the sound of nature [. . .]. A place to get lost . . . or to find yourself [André].

I  often  hike  in  the  mountains.  [. . .]  It  is  relaxing,  it  helps  me.  [. . .]  It  is  a  therapy  that I  recommend [Iago].

Accordingly,  the  pivotal  way  to  delve  into  the  region  is  walking.  In  this sense, trails are  relevant to access what is considered the soul of the region: the  Trevinca  peak.  A  revealing  initiative,  signposted  in  the  early 2000 s  but

16

not  officially  approved  as  a  GR, 5 was  the  Trevinca  Massif  trail  (Figure 7 ), a 135 km walk inspired by the well-known Tour du Mont Blanc Randonnée .

Knowing the idea of the Mont Blanc Massif, [. . .] it could [. . .] interrelate all the places in the  region  [. . .]  always  in  the  lowlands  [of  the  massif]  [. . .].  This  trail,  afterwards,  should have a kind of access to the highest parts, to the summits. [. . .] Three to four small huts were planned, open, for hikers [. . .]. [In some parts] the trail allows the view of Trevinca on the horizon, fantastic, [. . .] you see Trevinca covered in snow [Filipe].

Trevinca as a peak and the mountainous nature of the region are seen as central both to regional identity and at an international level (Figure 8 ). 'Trevinca is the highest summit in Galicia, [. . .] a distinguishing mark for the region' [Brandán]; '[Trevinca] is the  meeting point.  It  is  like  the  symbol  that  has  all  the  meaning there inside for us' [Tomé]. In this respect, the notion of 'Galician Highlands' as a brand was conceived in this instance, a label that was subsequently appropriated by a particular local government, as will be explained later.

The  extension  of  these  highlands  knows  no  borders.  The  massif  is  seen  as a  whole.  'I  don't  believe  in  borders.  I  don't  believe  that  beyond  Trevinca  [. . .] something  different  begins  [. . .].  There  is  continuity  between  both  sides  [. . .] [T]he region [. . .] is the same' [Tomé].

Hence,  a  natural  park  for  the  whole  region  is  upheld.  Taking  into  account that there is no cross-border cooperation in place and that the Galician side has

FIG. 8 -A group of mountaineers having climbed the Trevinca peak, unfolding a poster saying 'For environmental and social justice. World Environment Day' (our translation). Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 4 / 6 / 2016 ).

<!-- image -->

not  been  designated,  it  seems  essential  that  the  massif  as  a  whole  attains common protection. 'I would like this to be designated an interregional natural park.  [. . .]  We  have  a  mountain  that  is  shared,  forests  that  are  shared,  rivers, valleys, lakes . . . it is the same!' [Catuxa].

## TREVINCA  MOUNTAINS  AS  A  TOURISM  RESOURCE  APPROPRIATED  BY  A  VEIGA'S  LOCAL GOVERNMENT

It  is  highly  revealing  that  some  interviewees,  when  mentioning  'Trevinca,'  do not refer to the mountain(s), but to the unbuilt ski resort mentioned earlier.

Trevinca was the most important project [discussed in the early 2000 s] [. . .], but in the end, nothing came of it. They wanted to build a ski resort or something like that [Roi].

Then we had a project for Trevinca, but there was nowhere to accommodate visitors, and with this story about Trevinca [. . .] [it was possible] to develop tourism [Olalla].

This is evidence of a vision conceiving the massif as a potential tourism attraction ready to be intensively developed. Improving accessibility is a milestone of this narrative.

The ski resort  was a blow to the  whole area.  [. . .]  It  was  just  an  initial  rallying  point,  and from  there  . . .  [. . .]  I  think  the  only  potential  for  this  area  is  to  first  have  good  road infrastructure [. . .]. And attract tourists [Sabela].

We identify two spatial scales attached to this conception. The first is older, from the  early 2000 s,  and  consisted  of  a  LEADER  project  managed  by  several  local governments belonging to both autonomous regions (Figure 9 ).  Fundamentally devoted to tourism, the project initially focused on the ski resort. When this did not happen, it diversified amongst several tourism accommodation investments. 'With that project we decided to develop hotels and rural tourism businesses to attract more tourists' [Olalla].

Given that this LEADER device was led by A Veiga's local government, this municipality  has  gained  momentum,  increasingly  attaching  its  toponym  to Trevinca. Although  the massif is shared between  different municipalities, A  Veiga  is  making  more  profit  from  Trevinca,  understood  as  a  resource,  with the  declared  object  of  converting  it  into  an  economic  product.  A  Veiga's  local government used 'Galician Highlands,' an expression originally from mountaineering (see above), to promote the municipality in the 2000 s  and,  throughout the 2010 s,  it  has  consistently  marketed  the  area.  A  case  in  point  is  the  achievement of the 'Starlight Destination' label 6 for  the  municipality  of  A  Veiga  with the  name 'Trevinca-A Veiga' (Figure 10 ).  This  designation  has  attracted  widespread attention.

The only one [local government] who made it [in the tourism industry, within the region at large] is A Veiga with its Starlight certification. [. . .] I think it [the Starlight campaign] will

18

FIG. 9 -Signpost in Viana do Bolo showing the region covered by the LEADER intervention area. Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 26 / 1 / 2019 ).

<!-- image -->

be very beneficial; it will make the area known, whether directly or indirectly it is going to help the area [. . .]. It's a form of advertising [Brais].

In 2016 , A Veiga's local government funded four GRs (PR-G 198 , PR-G 198 . 1 , PRG 200 , PR-G 201 ). They reach the summit of Trevinca from different hamlets of the municipality, and are the first signs that have been blazed in the highest part of  the  mountains  (Figure 7 ).  Beyond  tourism,  these  developments  in  A  Veiga embrace other sectors by means of converting Trevinca into a trademark.

The marketing and promotion of an area encompasses everything. Today a liter of honey is worth more [because it is labeled 'Trevinca'] [. . .]. Once we have created the Trevinca brand, all  tourism,  livestock,  honey  . . .  products  with  this  trademark  will  increase  in  value [Hadrián].

These advances, led by A Veiga's local government, are discursively placed under the sustainability approach. However, some interviewees point out that they are

FIG. 10 -The welcome  signpost  when  entering  the  town  of  A  Veiga  says  Trevinca-A  Veiga rather than A Veiga. Source: Picture by Valerià Paül ( 5 / 11 / 2016 ).

<!-- image -->

incompatible  with  increasing  levels  of  nature  protection.  '[The  designation  of the  Natural Park] might be led by [A Veiga's] Local Government, but they are not willing to face hunters' [Xil].

THE  SANABRIA  LAKE  NATURAL  PARK  AS  A  TOURISM  DESTINATION,  WITH  TREVINCA  AS A  DISTANT  PEAK  CONSTITUTING  THE  BORDER  WITH  GALICIA

This narrative refers to the same landscape, but from the other side, instead of from a Galician perspective. The massif is seen as a remote and inaccessible area.

Getting there is very difficult. [. . .] Trevinca is the distant aim for many people [. . .]. It is the highest peak, the place which is furthest away. It requires an effort. It is an emblematic place for a lot of people, as it is challenging, and not a lot of people go there [Martiño].

These  mountains  are  perceived  as  tough,  as  an  endeavor  because  of  the  hard environmental conditions.

[To get to Trevinca] is the longest trail in terms of time that we have here [. . .], eight to ten hours. [. . .] You must be very careful [Xonxa].

A footbridge has fallen in the mountains [. . .] and in the mountains this [the infrastructure] is  constantly damaged [Millao].

20

This perspective of mountains being far away is derived from an understanding of the Sanabria Lake as the center of the region. From a tourism perspective, the lake might be connected with the mountains in the future.

We should encourage visitors to leave the lake and go to other places. [. . .] [The mountains] have a large capacity to receive visitors [Martiño].

The government of Castile and Leon is discussing installing a funicular [connecting the lake level, 1050 m,  with  the  top  of  a  neighboring  hill, 1600 m]  [. . .].  This  would  give  the  area a boost, it would become an important attraction, revitalizing the hamlets [Nuno].

The  notion  that  these  mountains  are  foreseen  as  part  of  an  expanded  tourism destination is consistent with the general agreement that the lake itself has been over-touristified, experiencing what is labeled as 'mass tourism' [Filipe]. 'There are more and more bars, hostels, hotels . . . and everything is competition. There are activities that there didn't use to be [. . .]. It's too much' [Xonxa].

The park has marked a GR (GR 84 )  structuring  the  protected  area  without connections with the environs (Figures 7 and Figure 11 ).  Accordingly,  the  park does  not  interact  with  Galicia.  'Relations  [with  Galicia]  are  . . .  scant.  [. . .]  We should have more cooperation [. . .] as it is the same area, it is exactly the same' [Martiño].  Trevinca  becomes,  then,  a  dividing,  and  even  invisible,  mountain. '[Trevinca]  is  the  peak  that  divides  us'  [Paulo].  'There  are  people  living  here [. . .] who have never been to [. . .] Trevinca nor do they even know that it exists' [Tomé].

## DISCUSSION  AND  CONCLUSIONS

This  paper  analyzes  the  discursive  emergence  of  the  Galician  Highlands  as a  spatial  imaginary,  trying  to  decipher  whether  this  leads  toward  a  new  Galician national landscape of its own and/or whether this responds to global forces. Three narratives  have  emerged  from  interviewing,  contributing  unequally  to  this  construction, as will be further argued. Each one of them seems consistent with either one  or  several  of  the  Western  imaginaries  regarding  mountains,  as  outlined  by Debarbieux ( 2004 )  and Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 ),  amongst others.

Firstly,  the  narrative  understanding  the  massif  as  a  place  of  wilderness  to  be protected because of its outstanding natural and spiritual values is in accordance with the enlightened and romantic imaginaries of the mountains-that is, the era of the Western 'invention of the mountain' (Joutard 1986 ; Short 1991 ; Martínez de Pisón  and  Álvaro 2002 ;  Sacareau 2003 ;  Debarbieux 2004 ;  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ). The association with mountaineering is highly relevant, not only in sportive terms-such  as  hiking-but,  more  transcendentally,  in  the  sense  of  establishing emotional connections (Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro 2002 ;  Nogué  and  Vicente 2004 ;  Bernbaum  and  Price 2013 ).  There  is  also  a  link  with  the  wilderness  vision (Short 1991 ;  Cronon 1995 ;  Depraz 2008 ;  Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Woods 2011 ;

FIG. 11 -A GR 84 blazed signpost, with the Trevinca peak, partially covered with clouds, in the background. The closest place that GR 84 is  to  the  peak  is 5 km (Figure 7 ).  Source: Picture by  Valerià  Paül  ( 3 / 6 / 2017 ).

<!-- image -->

Debarbieux 2019 ).  A further connection relates to the global mountain imaginary (Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ;  Price  and Kohler 2013 ),  as  evidenced in Figure 8 .

This  first  narrative  might  have  connections  with  nationalist  arguments  in accordance  with  theorizations  by  authors  such  as  Nogué  and  Vicente  ( 2004 ), Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 ),  Herb  ( 2018 ),  and  Paül  ( 2019 ).  However, we only find  a  feeble  vindication  in  this  regard  from  the  mountaineering  precedents  of the 1940 s50 s,  developed  in  tough  political  circumstances  that  complicated  the creation  and  dissemination  of  cultural  products  (Figure 12 ),  as  found  in  other cases analyzed by Martínez de Pisón and Álvaro ( 2002 ),  Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 ),  and  Della  Dora  ( 2016 ).  Moreover,  nowadays,  there  is  only  a  very  moderate  use  of  Galician  national  symbols-such  as  the  flag-in  current  mountaineering activities. A  possible underlying  factor is that, contrary to other countries  (Nogué  and  Vicente 2004 ;  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ;  Herb 2018 ), Galicia  lacks  its  own  landscape  tradition  linked  to  mountains  from  a  national perspective.

The  'Galician  Highlands'  notion  was  conceived  in  this first instance. Interestingly,  this  notion  was  named  to  resonate  with  Galician  identity  concerns-in an  attempt  to  enable  the  massif  to  be  assumed  at  the  national  level. Ironically,  the  notion  can  only  be  understood  within  some  immanent  global connections,  as  the  acknowledged  inspiration  is  the  Scottish  region  toponym,

22

FIG. 12 -Trevinca in the mid1940 s,  as  seen  by  the  mountaineer  Francisco Marfany, Gonzalo Gurriarán's friend. This is an unpublished drawing taken from the mostly unknown literature on the Galician highlands which was developed in the 1940 s50 s. Source: Ricardo Gurriarán's personal archive (reproduced with permission).

<!-- image -->

confirming that the Scottish Highlands landscape construction has had a  powerful  capacity  to  frame  a  spiritual  notion  of  distinctiveness  at  a  world scale (Perkins 2006 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ). In any case, the spread of this spatial category has been developed in the context of the second narrative, thus becoming a social imaginary, as the first narrative has had a humble capacity to influence wider imaginaries.

Secondly, the narrative conceiving the Trevinca Massif as a potential resource appropriated  by  political  entities,  especially  for  tourism  purposes,  matches  the modernist  imaginary  of  mountains  as  policy-making  regions  for  developing economic  activities  (Majoral 1997 ;  Pujadas  and  Font 1998 ;  Debarbieux 2004 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ). In this context, the Trevinca 2000 -2006 LEADER  device  can  be  read  as  an  institutionalization  of  mountain  regions, described  by  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz  ( 2010 )  and  Rob  McMorran  et  al.  ( 2015 ). However,  in  the 2010 s,  this  massif-scale  LEADER  device  vanished  and  the narrative  has  since  been  monopolized  by  A  Veiga's  local  government,  which has equalized the municipality with the massif as a whole.

Although we have found attempts to mobilize the primary sector  based on the  mountain  notion,  tourism  is  central  to  this  second  narrative.  Beyond  Paül et  al.  ( 2019 )  examination  of  the  emergence  of  Trevinca-A  Veiga  as  a  tourism destination,  this  research  bears  witness  to  the  ability  of  tourism  to  determine a  spatial  imaginary,  commodifying  a  rural  landscape  (Tonts  and  Greive 2002 ; Perkins 2006 ;  Woods 2011 ).  By  means  of  marketing,  labeling  development, and meetings of popular influencers on social networks, A Veiga's local government has been able to position Trevinca and the Galician Highlands at a Galicia-wide level  and  even  to  promote  the  mountains  as  a  landmark  for  Galicia  abroad (Figure 13 ).  Additionally,  with  the  Starlight  brand,  global  marketing  has  been

FIG. 13 -#Trevinca  on  the  official  tourism  Twitter  account  of  the  Galician  Government: a  glacial  lake  and  the  superbloom,  with  the  hashtags  #GaliciaYouHaveToLiveIt  #ChooseGalicia. Source: @turgalicia ( 31 / 7 / 2018 )  (reproduced with permission from Turismo de Galicia).

<!-- image -->

reinforced and now the area is proudly part of a worldwide network of certified regions  without  light  pollution. 7 This  is  a  worthy  addition  to  the  literature  on mountain  tourism  (see  Nepal  and  Chipeniuk 2005 ;  Price  and  Kohler 2013 ). Hence,  tourism  should  not  only  be  understood  as  an  economic  activity  in  the mountains,  but  also  as  a  relevant  procedure  to  create  and  impel  their  spatial imaginaries, implying a global dimension.

Thirdly,  the  Sanabria  Lake-centered  narrative  responds  to  the  inception  of protection devices in mountain areas (Depraz 2008 ; Debarbieux and Rudaz 2010 ; Price  and  Kohler 2013 ;  Arpin  and  Cosson 2015 ).  This  confirms  the  capacity  of protected  areas,  especially  national  and  natural  parks,  to  create  discourses  that can become spatial imaginaries. The development of this narrative clearly places tourism in its core but spatially overfocusing on the lake, with limited capacity to incorporate the massif. Although we acknowledge a will to access Trevinca and the highest areas, the narrative itself favors a vision of the mountains as remote, difficult, and so forth.

There is an inherent tension between the first narrative and the third one, as the former demands more protection by only allowing harmless forms of hiking, while  the  latter  envisages  infrastructure  and  investments  linked  to  increasing levels  of  tourism.  This  confirms  the  widespread  contest  between  tourism  and

24

protection,  resulting  in  multiple  solutions  (Nepal  and  Chipeniuk 2005 ;  Depraz 2008 ;  Price  and Kohler 2013 ;  Arpin and Cosson 2015 ).

This third narrative can also be interpreted under the lens of the interaction between  borders  and  mountains.  Indeed,  this  narrative  does  not  participate  in the social imaginary of the Galician Highlands, as it is detached from Galicia. In other words, although the Galician nationalist construction is feeble, as explained  above,  it  has  ultimately  contributed  to  the  spatial  divorce  dividing the massif into two parts: the western part has become, in a sense, a 'nationalized landscape,' and the eastern part is basically a natural park. Past case  studies  report  the  disputed  notion  of  'natural  borders'  coinciding  with mountains  (Sahlins 1990 ;  Debarbieux  and  Rudaz 2010 ; Fall 2010 ),  but  this research  makes  it  evident  that  this  is  an  immanent,  ongoing  debate.  In  fact, the contrast between [Paulo] saying Trevinca divides, while [Tomé] believing it unites is highly revealing.

The  separation  between  the  emergent  imaginary  of  the  Galician  Highlands within  Galicia,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Sanabria  Lake  Natural  Park,  on  the other,  bears  witness  to  the  lack  of  cooperation  between  neighboring,  devolved, autonomous  governments  within  Spain,  as  already  described  by  Joan  Romero ( 2009 , 2012 ).  In  fact, the first narrative analyzed here suggests the idea of global protection for the massif as a whole. Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 ), Jörg Balsiger and  Stéphane  Nahrath  ( 2015 ),  Charles  C.  Chester  ( 2015 ),  and  Debarbieux  et  al. ( 2015 ) have reported cases where mountains have been the instance for cooperation.  Why  this  is  possible  between  neighboring  countries  but  not  in  our  casestudy  area,  where  the  border  corresponds  to  an  internal  limit  between  two devolved territorial entities within Spain, remains an open question.

The  overall  interpretation  of  the  obtained  narratives  does  not  dispute  the model of Western succession of mountain imaginaries by Debarbieux ( 2004 ) and Debarbieux and Rudaz ( 2010 ). However, we stress that this background literature does  not  take  into  consideration  the  narratives  obtained  from  interviewing, reducing  the  ability  to  capture  nuances  and  contradictions  on  the  ground,  as expected by Ruiz Olabuénaga ( 1999 ) and Valentine ( 2005 ). In fact, the dominant literature  on  mountain  imaginaries  seems  largely  based  on  elitist  cultural  products. However, 'to prevent the social imaginary from being a kind of floating abstraction  with  a  vague  status,  it  has  to  be  attached  to  concrete  practices, including  those  of  individual  imagination'  (Debarbieux 2019 , 4 ).  We  therefore conclude that in order to grasp social imaginaries regarding the mountains and their national and/or global ascriptions, it is essential to start from the views of individuals.  Importantly,  we  also  infer  that  imaginations  can  have  a  material consequence,  as  expressed  in  Figure 7 ,  where  every  hiking  trail  is  the  shape  of a particular narrative.

This paper has shown that the emergence of the Galician Highlands as a new socio-spatial imaginary about Galicia responds to two interrelated processes. On

the  one  hand,  the  overall  preference  for  coastal  and  farming  landscapes  in Galicia  is  being  nuanced  with  the  appearance  of  the  mountainous  landscape that we have analyzed here. Hence, the Galician national landscape imaginaries are experiencing a reconfiguration in relation to the inherited visions discussed above. On the other hand, the rise of the Galician Highlands construct has been impelled by global forces, namely tourism and branding for promotion purposes. In this regard, the ultimate construction of a new national landscape for Galicia based on mountains, although using some national attributes (for example, the name  of  Galicia  itself),  seems  more  related  to  the  need  of  positioning  Galicia internationally,  embracing  an  inherent  global  dimension.  In  the  end,  it  can  be asserted  that  Galicia  has  been  incorporated  into  the  club  of  many  Western countries  with  a  mountain  imaginary.  Thus,  the  recent  materialization  of a deliberate artistic project on Galician mountains, led by photographer Fernández Pérez de Lis ( 2017 ),  evidences  that  the  mountains-with Trevinca at the forefront-have definitively become a Galician spatial imaginary.

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We acknowledge all the interviewees for their time and their insightful views. We thank Prof Holly Barcus and Prof William Moseley, who led the special issue where this paper is published, after the 27 th IGU CSRS Annual Colloquium held in Minnesota and Wisconsin (USA) in July 2019 , including their review of an early draft of this manuscript. We are grateful for the helpful comments and criticisms made by the three anonymous referees. The authors would like to thank Carmel Sherrington and Prof Laura Lojo for their work editing the English on different versions of this paper. We also acknowledge Alejandro  Gómez  Pazo  for  his  support  producing  the  maps  through  intensive  GIS  effort  and  Dr Ricardo Gurriarán for granting us access to his personal archive. The customary disclaimers apply.

## FUNDING

The  fieldwork  necessary  to  carry  out  these  interviews  was  funded  by  the  Galician  Government (Project n. 2016 -PG 009 :  'Territorial Cooperation in the Galician Borderlands: Analyzing External and Internal Cross-border Governance').

## NOTES

- 1 .  Following  Debarbieux  ( 2004 ), the attention here concentrates on Western  countries, although the West is a very problematic concept (Lewis and Wigen 1997 ).
- 2 .  Under  LEADER, specific rural regions are selected to encourage development projects and actions based on local strategies.
- 3 .  Except in the case of Porto, the other municipalities have more than one hamlet in their local government area. In order to refer to the area as a whole, we favor the municipal scale (with nine municipalities shown in Figures 3 and 5 ).
- 4 .  An EU network of protected areas. Despite the alleged consistency across the EU, protection is  a  national  (in  Spain,  regional)  responsibility.  See  https://ec.europa.eu/environment/nature/nat ura 2000 /index\_en.htm
- 5 .  GR  is  the  acronym  for Grande  Randonnée in  French,  a  European-wide  system  of  official long-distance footpaths blazed with characteristic marks consisting of white and red stripes.
- 6 .  It  is  awarded by the Starlight Foundation (Institute of Astrophysics of the Canary Islands).
- [7 .  https://www.fundacionstarlight.org/en/section/list-of-starlight-tourist-destinations/ 293 .html.](https://www.fundacionstarlight.org/en/section/list-of-starlight-tourist-destinations/293.html)

26

## ORCID

Valerià Paül http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3007-1523

Juan-M. Trillo-Santamaría http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3842-3079

## REFERENCES

- Arpin,  I.,  and  A.  Cosson. 2015 .  The  Category  of  Mountain  as  Source  of  Legitimacy  for  National Parks. Environmental Science &amp; Policy 49 : 57 -65 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.envsci. 2014 . 07 . 005 .
- Balsiger,  J.,  and  S.  Nahrath. 2015 .  Functional  Regulatory  Spaces  and  Policy  Diffusion  in  Europe: The Case of Mountains. Environmental Science &amp; Policy 49 : 8 -20 . doi: 10 . 1016 /j. envsci. 2015 . 01 . 004 .
- Beramendi, J. 2007 . De provincia a nación. Historia do galeguismo político .  Vigo, Spain: Xerais.
- Bernbaum,  E.,  and  L.  W.  Price. 2013 .  Attitudes  Towards  Mountains.  In Mountain  Geography: Physical and Human Dimensions , edited by M. F. Price, et al., 253 -266 . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Byers,  A.  C.,  L.  W.  Price,  and  M.  F.  Price. 2013 .  An  Introduction  to  Mountains.  In Mountain Geography:  Physical  and  Human  Dimensions ,  edited  by  M.  F.  Price,  et  al., 1 -10 .  Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Cameron,  J. 2016 .  Focusing  on  the  Focus  Group.  In Qualitative  Research  Methods  in  Human Geography ,  edited by I. Hay, 203 -224 .  Don Mills, Canada: Oxford University Press.
- Chester, C. C. 2015 .  Yellowstone to Yukon: Transborder Conservation across a Vast International Landscape. Environmental Science &amp; Policy 49 : 75 -84 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.envsci. 2014 . 08 . 009 .
- Cope,  M. 2016 .  Organizing  and  Analyzing  Qualitative  Data.  In Qualitative  Research  Methods  in Human Geography ,  edited by I. Hay, 373 -392 .  Don Mills, Canada: Oxford University Press.
- Crang,  M. 2005 .  Analysing  Qualitative  Materials.  In Methods  in  Human  Geography ,  edited  by R. Flowerdew and D. Martin, 218 -232 .  Harlow, UK: Prentice Hall.
- Cronon,  W. 1995 .  The  Trouble  with  Wilderness;  Or,  Getting  Back  to  the  Wrong  Nature.  In Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature , 69 -90 . New York: W. W. Norton &amp; Co.
- Cunha,  S.  F.,  and  L.  W.  Price. 2013 .  Agricultural  Settlement  and  Land  Use  in  Mountains.  In Mountain Geography: Physical and Human Dimensions ,  edited  by  M. F.  Price, et  al., 301 -331 . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- De Castro, R. 1863 . Cantares Gallegos .  Vigo, Spain: Juan Compañel.
- Debarbieux,  B. 2004 .  The  Symbolic  Order  of  Objects  and  the  Frame  of  Geographical  Action:  An Analysis of the Modes and Effects of Categorisation of the Geographical World as Applied to the Mountains in the West. GeoJournal 60 ( 4 ): 397 -405 .  doi: 10 . 1023 /B:GEJO. 0000042976 . 00775 . 24 .
- Debarbieux, B., and G. Rudaz. 2010 . Les faiseurs de montagne: Imaginaires politiques et territorialités XVIII e -XXI e siècle .  Paris:  Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.
- Debarbieux, B., M. F. Price, and J. Balsiger. 2015 .  The Institutionalization of Mountain Regions in Europe. Regional Studies 49 ( 7 ): 1193 -1207 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 00343404 . 2013 . 812784 .
- ---. 2019 . Social  Imaginaries  of  Space.  Concepts  and  Cases .  Cheltenham/Northampton,  UK: Edward Elgar.
- Della Dora, V. 2016 . Mountain: Nature and Culture .  London: Reaktion Books.
- Depraz, S. 2008 . Géographie des espaces naturels protégés. Genèse, principes et enjeux territoriaux . Paris: Armand Colin.
- Fall, J. J. 2010 .  Artificial States? On the Enduring Geographical Myth of Natural Borders. Political Geography 29 ( 3 ): 140 -147 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.polgeo. 2010 . 02 . 007 .
- Fernández Pérez de Lis, J. 2017 . Catro ventos=Four Winds .  Milladoiro, Spain: Fabulatorio.
- Gurriarán,  R. 2005 . Gonzalo  Gurriarán  Gurriarán  ( 1904 -1975 ) .  O  Barco  de  Valdeorras,  Spain: Peymar.
- Herb, G. H. 2018 .  Power,  Territory,  and  National  Identity.  In Scaling  Identities:  Nationalism  and Territoriality ,  edited  by  G.  H.  Herb  and  D.  H.  Kaplan, 7 -30 .  Lanham,  UK:  Rowman  &amp; Littlefield.
- Joutard, P. 1986 . L'invention du Mont Blanc .  Paris:  Gallimard/Julliard.

- Kitchin, R., and N. J. Tate. 2000 . Conducting Research into Human  Geography.  Theory, Methodology and Practice .  New York: Routledge.
- Lewis, M. W., and K. Wigen. 1997 . The Myth of Continents: A Critique of Metageography . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Lois,  R.  C.  et  al. 2015 .  The  Way  of  Saint  James:  A  Contemporary  Geographical  Analysis.  In The Changing World Religion Map ,  edited by S. Brunn, 709 -732 .  Dordrecht, NL: Springer.

López Sández, M.

2008

.

Paisaxe e nación. A creación discursiva do territorio

.  Vigo, Spain: Galaxia.

- López  Silvestre,  F. 2004 . El  discurso  del  paisaje.  Historia  cultural  de  una  idea  estética  en  Galicia ( 1723 -1931 ) .  Santiago de Compostela, Spain: Universidade de Santiago de Compostela.
- Majoral, R. 1997 .  Desarrollo rural en zonas de montaña. Geographicalia 34 : 23 -49 .
- Martínez  de  Pisón,  E.,  and  S.  Álvaro. 2002 . El  sentimiento  de  la  montaña.  Doscientos  años  de soledad .  Madrid: Desnivel.
- Mato, M. 1998 . A escrita da terra. Configuración do espacio natural na literatura galega . A Coruña, Spain: Espiral Maior.
- McMorran, R., et al. 2015 . A Mountain Food Label for Europe?. Journal of Alpine Research 103 ( 4 ). doi: 10 . 4000 /rga. 2654 .
- Miguélez-Carballeira, H. 2014 . Galiza, um  povo  sentimental?  Género,  política e cultura no imaginário nacional galego .  Santiago de Compostela, Spain: Associaçom Galega da Língua.
- Murado, M. A. 2008 . Otra idea de Galicia .  Barcelona: Debate.
- Nepal,  S.  K.,  and  R.  Chipeniuk. 2005 .  Mountain  Tourism:  Toward  a  Conceptual  Framework. Tourism Geographies 7 ( 3 ): 313 -333 .  doi: 10 . 1080 / 14616680500164849 .
- Nogué, J., and J. Vicente. 2004 . Landscape and National Identity in Catalonia. Political Geography 23 ( 2 ): 113 -132 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.polgeo. 2003 . 09 . 005 .
- Paül,  V. 2019 .  Catro  breves  hipóteses  na  interface  entre  paisaxe  e  nación  en  Galicia.  In Paisaxes nacionais no mundo global , edited by J.-M. Trillo-Santamaría and R. C. Lois, 83 -109 . Santiago de Compostela, Spain: Grupo de Análise Territorial.
- Paül,  V.,  J.-M.  Trillo-Santamaría,  and  F.  Haslam  Mckenzie. 2019 .  The  Invention  of  a  Mountain Tourism Destination: An Exploration of Trevinca-A Veiga (Galicia, Spain). Tourist Studies 19 ( 3 ): 313 -335 .  doi: 10 . 1177 / 1468797619833364 .
- Perkins, H. K. 2006 . Commodification: Re-Resourcing Rural Areas. In Handbook of Rural Studies , edited by P. Cloke, T. Marsden, and P. Mooney, 243 -257 .  Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
- Price, M. F., and T. Kohler. 2013 .  Sustainable Mountain Development. In Mountain Geography: Physical and Human Dimensions , edited by M. F. Price, et al., 333 -365 . Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Pujadas, R., and J. Font. 1998 . La ordenación de las áreas de montaña.  In Ordenación y planificación territorial , 265 -283 .  Madrid: Síntesis.
- Romero, J. 2009 . Geopolítica y gobierno del territorio en España . València, Spain: Tirant lo Blanch. ---. 2012 . España inacabada: Organización territorial del Estado, autonomía política y  reconocimiento de la diversidad nacional. Documents d'Anàlisi Geogràfica 58 ( 1 ): 13 -59 .  doi: 10 . 5565 /rev/dag. 190 .
- Ruiz Olabuénaga, J. I. 1999 . Metodología de la investigación cualitativa .  Bilbao, Spain: Universidad de Deusto.
- Sacareau, I. 2003 . La montagne: Une approche géographique .  Paris:  Belin.
- Sahlins, P. 1990 .  Natural  Frontiers Revisited: France's Boundaries since the Seventeenth Century. The American Historical Review 95 ( 5 ): 1423 -1451 .  doi: 10 . 2307 / 2162692 .
- Santos, X. M., and J.-M. Trillo-Santamaría. 2017 .  Tourism and Nation in Galicia (Spain). Tourism Management Perspectives 22 : 98 -108 .  doi: 10 . 1016 /j.tmp. 2017 . 03 . 006 .
- Schulz, G. 1835 . Descripción geognóstica del Reino de Galicia, acompañada de un mapa petrogr[á]fico de este país . Madrid: Imprenta de los Herederos de Collado.
- Short,  J.  R. 1991 . Imagined  Country:  Environment,  Culture  and  Society .  Syracuse,  NY:  Syracuse University Press.
- Tonts, M., and S. Greive. 2002 . Commodification and Creative Destruction in the Australian Rural Landscape:  The  Case  of  Bridgetown,  Western  Australia. Australian  Geographical  Studies 40 ( 1 ): 58 -70 .  doi: 10 . 1111 / 1467 -8470 . 00161 .
- Valentine, G. 2005 .  Tell Me about . . . : Using Interviews as a Research Methodology. In Methods in Human Geography , edited by R. Flowerdew and D. Martin, 110 -127 . Harlow, UK: Prentice Hall. Woods, M. 2011 . Rural .  New York: Routledge.