<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## Land-Use and Land-Cover Changes and Farmers' Perceptions of Ecosystem Services in an Eastern Amazon Rural Settlement

Ceália Cristine dos Santos, Jhonatan Andrés Muñoz Gutiérrez, Michel Brossard, Thierry Desjardins &amp; Altamiro Souza de Lima Ferraz Jr.

To cite this article: Ceália Cristine dos Santos, Jhonatan Andrés Muñoz Gutiérrez, Michel Brossard, Thierry Desjardins &amp; Altamiro Souza de Lima Ferraz Jr. (2023) LandUse and Land-Cover Changes and Farmers' Perceptions of Ecosystem Services in an Eastern Amazon Rural Settlement, The Professional Geographer, 75:6, 932-946, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2023.2199326

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2023.2199326

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 22 May 2023.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 256

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 2 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Land-Use and Land-Cover Changes and Farmers ' Perceptions of Ecosystem Services in an Eastern Amazon Rural Settlement

## Ce  alia Cristine dos Santos

State University of Maranh ~ ao, Brazil, and Federal University of Maranh ~ ao, Brazil

## Jhonatan Andr  es Mu ~ noz Guti  errez

State University of Maranh ~ ao, Brazil

## Michel Brossard

UMR Eco&amp;Sols (CIRAD, INRA, IRD, Montpellier SupAgro) Montpellier SupAgro, France

## Thierry Desjardins

UMR iEES-Paris (UPMC -CNRS -INRA -UPEC -IRD -AgroParisTech), France

## Altamiro Souza de Lima Ferraz, Jr.

State University of Maranh ~ ao, Brazil

Understanding the relationship between land-use and land-cover changes, the ecosystem services (ES) offered, and the farmers ' perception about these services is essential for designing adequate strategies in the management and conservation of natural resources. Therefore, this research aims to describe the evolution of the land use and land cover, and the farmers ' perceptions of ES at Diamante Negro Juta  ı settlement, in the Monc ¸ ~ ao municipality, Maranh ~ ao state, Eastern Amazon, Brazil. The data were collected through a mapping of use units and land cover, and 130 structured questionnaires. Farmers recognize ES as highly important for their well-being and livelihood. Food (agriculture and livestock), fish, fresh water, and lakes were perceived by farmers as highly important. Fishing, however, is the most relevant ES. In contrast, it is also the most threatened because of land-use alteration. In the period from 1995 to 2015, overall natural ground cover was reduced. Water bodies were the most highly affected with an 85 percent decrease in relation to the total area of the analysis period. The decrease in secondary forest areas (4.3 percent) and water bodies are reflections of climate change, which also has a direct impact on forms of use. Farmers ' perceptions of ES can be used to formulate policies for conservation of natural resources. Key Words: landscape changes, local knowledge, slash-and-burn, social vulnerability.

E cosystems provide a series of benefits for human well-being denominated ecosystem services (ES; Costanza et al. 1997; MEA 2005; Boyd and Banzafh 2007; Fisher, Turner, and Morling 2009; TEEB 2010). The approach to these services is useful for decision-making in conservation and natural land management (Tallis and Polasky 2009; Harrison et al. 2010). ES include provisioning services, reflecting the goods and services produced in the ecosystem such as food, fiber, raw materials, and water; regulating services, resulting from the regulatory capacity of the ecosystem to regulate water, habitat, air quality, and water quality; cultural services, which are the benefits that people obtain through tourism, aesthetic values, and spiritual enrichment; and supporting services, the underlying ecosystem functions that enable other services to function such as primary production, soil formation, and nutrient supply or nutrient cycling according to the most widely accepted classification of MEA

(2005; see also De Groot, Wilson, and Boumans 2002; Perrings et al. 2011; Wainger and Mazzotta 2011; Hasan et al. 2020). Understanding the status of ES in time and space is fundamental for their management, especially on local and regional scales, because without such information it becomes difficult for managers to make decisions (Paetzold, Warren, and Maltby 2010). The dynamics of changes in land use and land cover can have a direct impact on the supply of ES by different ecosystems (Muleta, Kidane, and Bezie 2021).

Land-use and land-cover change (LULCC) can affect a landscape ' s ability to provide ES (Vihervaara, Ronka, and Walls 2010; Paudyal et al. 2015; Zhao et al. 2020). LULCC are a major global challenge for sustainable development (Ketema et al. 2020). Thus, understanding the impacts of land-use change is essential for mitigating the consequences of human -environment interactions (Hasan et al. 2020). LULCC are directly affected by ecological

processes and socioeconomic factors, incentivizing the integration of study between land use, data, and socioeconomic factors that help to elucidate this change (Freitas et al. 2013).

Agricultural development has been an effective instrument for poverty alleviation and economic development in developing countries over the latter half of the twentieth century, and over 80 percent of rural people globally still depend on agriculture for their living (De Janvry and Sadoulet 2010; Pham and Smith 2014). Agroecosystem sustainability is considered to be an essential condition for longterm agricultural profitability (Kumar, Singh, and Mathur 2006).

In the context of several research studies addressing environmental questions, the value -belief -norm (VBN) theory revealed that values and beliefs influence pro-environmental attitudes and behaviors (Stern et al. 1999), and are important instruments for the promotion of sustainability. Considering values present in manifestations resulting from perception, this evaluation becomes relevant to support environmental management. Perception is a response of the senses to external stimuli; thus certain phenomena are clearly recorded and much of what we perceive has great value for biological survival (Tuan 2012). Farmers ' perceptions of ES are important in formulating policies for natural resource management (Hein et al. 2006; Blayac et al. 2014). Information about farmers ' perceptions of ES can provide and document an overview of the management practices and measures to be adopted by farmers (Fontana et al. 2013; Smith and Sullivan 2014). The elucidation of the perceptions of local farmers is undoubtedly very important to assist in meaningful decision-making in understanding local perspectives for the formulation and adoption of political interventions (Jendoubi et al. 2020).

To understand the signs of stagnation or income reduction, specific biophysical and socioeconomic components must be taken into account and quantified to identify the responsible factors (Singh et al. 2008). ES evaluations are important to indicate potential losses of these services caused by LULCC. In this context, this study aimed to describe the land-cover evolution over twenty years and farmers ' perceptions about ES in relation to their socioeconomic characteristics in the Diamante Negro Juta  ı Settlement Project in Maranh ~ ao, Eastern Amazon (Brazil).

## Method

Study Area

The study was developed in the Eastern Amazon, in the Diamante Negro Juta  ı Settlement Project (SP). Diamante Negro is situated in the eastern portion of the Monc ¸ ~ ao municipality microregion of the lowlands in northern Maranh ~ ao state, Brazil (see Figure 1). This region is among the Amazon regions most degraded by illegal deforestation (Silva et al. 2020). The average annual temperature in the area is 26.8  C, and the average annual precipitation is 1,700 mm (Maranh ~ ao 2002). The region ' s soils have low fertility, which limits the productivity and sustainability of production systems (dos Santos et al. 2018).

The municipality of Monc ¸ ~ ao has an area of 1.353,31 km 2 and 31,738 inhabitants. Its Human Development Index is low (0.546; IBGE 2010). There are twelve rural settlements in this municipality, including Diamante Negro Juta  ı SP, created by Executive Order No. 255 dated 17 March 1994. The Diamante Negro Juta  ı SP encompasses 9,338.65 ha and shelters 266 families distributed in the communities of Vila Diamante, Serdote, Nova Morada, Morada Nova, S ~ ao Raimundo,  Agua Branca, Centro dos Cordeiros, and Ananazal.

The communities of the Diamante Negro Juta  ı SP survive mainly from slash-and-burn agriculture and to a lesser extent from livestock, artisanal fishing, and the extraction of Babassu coconuts ( Orbignya phalerata Mart; INCRA 2006). In the area there is also ebb-tide cultivation, which is carried out in areas of flooded fields in the dry season when the levels of lakes and rivers decrease (De Ara  ujo, Porto, and da Silva 2004). Nonperennial rice, corn, cassava, and bean crops are prominent in intercropping or isolated systems (INCRA 2006). Babassu coconut extracting activities that supplement the family income also stand out, and are executed mainly by women. In the Amazon biome, slash-andburn is the main method used by family and traditional farmers to prepare and fertilize the soil (Villa et al. 2020). With the intensification of slash-andburn, however, riparian forests, the soil, ES provisions such as water availability (Celentano et al. 2014; Celentano et al. 2017), and the productivity and income of farmers have been negatively affected (Jakovac et al. 2015; Jakovac et al. 2017). Slash-andburn consists of cutting down forest (primary or secondary) and then burning it. After the burning, crops are realized, taking advantage of the minerals deposited by the burning of the vegetation. Soon afterward, when fertility is lost, the area is left fallow for a period of between four and ten years before being used again (Rego and Kato 2018; Villa et al. 2021). The main environmental problems associated with fires were identified in the area by direct observation and information from farmers.

Mapping and Classification of Land Uses and Land Cover

In this study, a multitemporal analysis of satellite TM-LANDSAT5 and TM-LANDSAT8 data was

Figure 1 Location of the Diamante Negro Juta  ı Settlement Project, Monc ¸ ~ ao-Ma, Brazil.

<!-- image -->

performed. The images, dated from October 1995 and September 2006, both TM-LANDSAT 5 in color composite RGB bands (3, 4, and 5), and September 2015 (TM-LANDSAT 8), RGB (bands 5, 6, and 7), were acquired in the catalog of the National Institute for Space Research (INPE). These dates were chosen because they had the least cloud cover, with better resolution.

The mapping of land use and land cover was vectorized manually. The land-use and land-cover (LULC) units were identified and georeferenced on site and later confirmed with the use of images.

With reading and interpretation of images, six different LULC units were classified and measured, allowing an interpretation of spatial dynamics: secondary vegetation, agriculture and livestock, water bodies, rural agglomeration, meadows, and flooded meadows. Georeferencing images and digital data were processed by the Image Processing Georeferencing System SPRING, version 4.3.3 developed by INPE (2016). The images were georeferenced with the geographic coordinate system in the Geoprocessing Laboratory (LABGEO) from Maranh ~ ao State University-UEMA. The SPRING 4.3.3 software was employed to apply contrast manipulation and color composition on images. The final production of the maps was implemented in the software package CorelDraw X6.

## Data Collection

Socioeconomic evaluation of the area was carried out through the use of a semistructured questionnaire. The questionnaire had forty-six questions (Appendix A) and was divided into three parts: (1) socioeconomic profile of the farmer ' s family, (2) economic profile of the rural producers ' work and income, and (3) the farmer ' s perception of ES. The questionnaires were pretested and applied from July to October 2015. Initially, we held a meeting to present the research objectives to the leaders of the Diamante Negro Juta  ı SP. The field research was carried out with the application of questionnaires to the farmers to obtain information about their perceptions about the ES in the area. The research had the consent of the interviewees through the free informed consent form (Appendix B).

## Socioeconomic Characterization

The 266 farming families in Diamante Negro are distributed into the following communities: Vila Diamante ( n ¼ 96), Serdote ( n ¼ 18), Nova Morada ( n ¼ 15), Morada Nova ( n ¼ 38), S ~ ao Raimundo ( n ¼ 18),  Agua Branca ( n ¼ 35), Centro dos Cordeiros ( n ¼ 32), and Ananazal ( n ¼ 14). The sample size was calculated using the finite population sampling method

Figure 2 Classification of ecosystem services in the area of study based on the TEEB and MEA. TEEB ¼ The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity; MEA ¼ Millennium Ecosystem Assessment.

<!-- image -->

(Miot 2011). In total, 130 head-of-household farmers representing 48.4 percent of the total households in the settlement were interviewed. In each community, about 50 percent of the heads of households were interviewed individually (adult experienced farmers). Each interview lasted between fifty and eighty minutes: Vila Diamante ( n ¼ 47), Serdote ( n ¼ 9), Nova Morada ( n ¼ 8), Morada Nova ( n ¼ 18), S ~ ao Raimundo ( n ¼ 9),  Agua Branca ( n ¼ 17), Centro dos Cordeiros ( n ¼ 15), and Ananazal ( n ¼ 7).

## Classification and Perception of Ecosystem Services

ES were classified according to the Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity and Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA 2005; TEEB 2010).

Ten ES were selected and identified on site from direct observation: biodiversity, food (agriculture and livestock), fishes (fishing), producing fresh water, providing shade, biological pest control, preventing soil erosion, conserving rivers and lakes, landscape beauty, and recreation. The classification and services surveyed in this study are shown in Figure 2.

To evaluate the importance of and threat to ES perceived by 130 farmers, the following concept of ES was used: ' the benefits that people receive from ecosystems ' (MEA 2005; TEEB 2010). ES were evaluated on a Likert scale from 0 ( low ) to 10 ( high ) considering attributes such as service importance and threats. Farmers assessed the level of importance of and threat to ES from very low to very high. According to the results and based on the median, the following classification for each of the

attributes was adopted: low (0 -3.9), medium (4 -7.9), and high (8 -10). Box plot charts were used to demonstrate the variability responses for each ES within each of the two attributes (Smith and Sullivan 2014). Survey data were analyzed using Statistica 8.0 software.

## Data Analysis

Descriptive statistics were used for summarizing the data. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to assess the correlation between the perception of ES and socioeconomic variables (age, years of schooling, family members, income), between different age groups. For the development of PCA, the average value of perceptions was used. All variables were standardized as they were on different measurement scales. We keep the first three eigenvalues (1.68, 1.38, 1.00) because they are  1 and together represent 67.9 percent of the variance (Kassambara 2017). We also identify the contribution and significance of the variables in the conformation of each principal component. The PCA was performed using the FactoMineR (Le, Josse, and Husson 2008) and Factoextra (Kassambara and Mundt 2020) packages of the software R, version 4.0.5 (R Core Team 2021).

## Results

## Changes in Land-Use and Land-Cover Units

Six LULC units were identified: secondary vegetation, agriculture and livestock, water bodies, rural agglomeration, meadows, and flooded meadows. The unit with the greatest coverage was secondary vegetation, occupying about half of the area (48.02 percent) and the one with the least coverage was rural agglomeration (0.17 percent) on the date of the study.

In the evaluated period of 1995 to 2015, all natural soil cover was reduced. Water bodies were the most affected, with a diminution of 85 percent in relation to the total area of the analyzed period. The secondary forest had a reduction of 4.30 percent (200ha) and meadows of 5.84 percent (531ha). In contrast, agriculture and livestock (mainly cattle) increased their area by 118 percent (1995 ¼ 272ha; 2015 ¼ 595ha). Similarly, flooded fields increased their area by around 60 percent (Figure 3).

The ways of exploiting natural resources and developing production activities in the settlement communities are similar. In the dynamics of changes in land use and cover with deforestation and fires, there was an advance in slash-and-burn agriculture, with diversified cultivation and extensive livestock, cattle, and traditional agriculture starting to occupy areas where there were previously secondary forests. The reduction of water bodies resulted in an increase in the surrounding area formed by flooded meadows. There was an expansion of the areas occupied by the settled farmers in the period from 1995 to 2015, and despite the number of settled families remaining the same, the quantity of members increased.

## Socioeconomic Characteristics

Family farmers in the SP have been working in the meadows for more than two decades. They mainly come from the municipalities of Igarap  e do Meio,

<!-- image -->

Year

Figure 3 Main land use and land cover in the settlements project, 1995 -2015 period.

Table 1 Sociodemographic characteristics of farmers

| Variable                           |   Quantity |     % |
|------------------------------------|------------|-------|
| Gender                             |            |       |
| Male                               |      97    | 74.62 |
| Female                             |      33    | 25.38 |
| Age                                |            |       |
| < 30                               |       9    |  6.92 |
| 31 - 145                           |      45    | 34.62 |
| 46 - 60                            |      48    | 36.92 |
| > 60                               |      28    | 21.54 |
| Educational level                  |            |       |
| Illiterate                         |      31    | 23.85 |
| Incomplete literacy                |      15    | 11.54 |
| Incomplete elementary school       |      38    | 29.23 |
| Complete elementary school         |      26    | 20    |
| High school                        |      17    | 13.08 |
| College degree                     |       3    |  2.31 |
| Place of origin                    |            |       |
| Igarap  e do Meio                                    |      48    | 36.92 |
| Monc ¸ ~ ao                        |      25    | 19.23 |
| Vit  oria                                    |      16    | 12.31 |
| Viana                              |       5    |  3.85 |
| Bacabal                            |       5    |  3.85 |
| Anajatuba                          |       3    |  2.31 |
| Arari                              |       3    |  2.31 |
| Others                             |      25    | 19.23 |
| Family                             |            |       |
| Mean family size                   |       4.58 |       |
| Family structure                   |            |       |
| Nuclear family                     |      88    | 67.69 |
| Extended family                    |      42    | 32.31 |
| Mean number of children per family |       5.1  |       |
| Income source                      |            |       |
| Agriculture                        |     110    | 75.34 |
| Fishing                            |       7    |  4.79 |
| Babassu coconut extraction         |      17    | 11.64 |
| Retired                            |       5    |  3.42 |
| Others                             |       7    |  4.79 |
| Social organization participation  |            |       |
| Union of Rural Workers             |      84    | 40.58 |
| Cooperative of Rural Producers     |      13    |  6.28 |
| Fishermen colony                   |      14    |  6.76 |
| Association of Rural Producers     |      96    | 46.38 |

Note : Family size ¼ number of individuals per family; nuclear family ¼ formed by parents and children; extended family ¼ parents, children, grandchildren, sons-in-law, daughters-in-law, brothers-in-law and other relatives.

Monc ¸ ~ ao, and Vit  oria do Mearim, and also from other nearby municipalities such as Viana, Bacabal, and Arari, all in the state of Maranh ~ ao (Table 1).

Three times more men than women were interviewed. The settlers ' families are large, with an average of 5.1 children per family. The average age of family farmers was fifty years. In relation to formal education level, 77.25 percent of the respondents were literate.

The farmers ' families hold an area of about 16ha, with an average investment in production of a little more than 400 Brazilian reals (R$) per year (US$114 per year in 2015), which is used in the payment of daily allowances for other workers to assist in the production. The association of slash-and-burn and floodplain agriculture, especially in subsistence agricultural production, is noteworthy. Rice, maize, cassava, beans, gherkins, okra, pumpkins, cucumbers, and watermelons are the most cultivated crops. Several of the families have an approximate income

Table 2 Characteristics of rural production and income of the Diamante Negro Settlement Project

| Variable                                  |   Quantity | %     |
|-------------------------------------------|------------|-------|
| Area (ha) (mean /property)                |      16.27 | -     |
| Investment (R$) (property/year)           |     435.83 | -     |
| Type of agriculture                       |            |       |
| Slash-and-burn                            |      61    | 46.92 |
| Floodplain agriculture                    |       6    | 4.62  |
| Slash-and-burn and floodplain agriculture |      63    | 48.46 |
| Income (Minimal wage, 2015)               |            |       |
| > 0.5                                     |      14    | 10.77 |
| 0.51 - 1                                  |      29    | 23.08 |
| 1.1 - 1.5                                 |      56    | 42.30 |
| 1.51 - 2                                  |      11    | 8.46  |
| 2.1 - 2.5                                 |      17    | 13.07 |
| 2.51 - 3                                  |       3    | 2.31  |
| Income composition                        |            |       |
| Retirement                                |            | 65.90 |
| Slash-and-burn and floodplain agriculture |            | 39.09 |
| Employment contract                       |            | 30.54 |
| Social programs                           |            | 24.48 |
| Extensive livestock farming               |            | 9.58  |
| Babassu extraction                        |            | 3.36  |
| Fishing                                   |            | 3.05  |

of one and a half times the minimum wage (R$788; US$225 in 2015; Brazil 2014). Most of the money that forms the income of families comes from retirement, because the income obtained from the sale of agricultural products is small. Most of the production is used for family consumption, but there are also service contracts and social programs, and these resources are also considered important. (Table 2).

## Understanding Ecosystem Services

One of the relevant results of this study was that the term ecosystem services is neither recognized nor used by farmers to refer to the benefits they obtain from an ecosystem. ES in general, however, have high value, according to the perception of communities. The ES considered most important was fishing, whereas the least important ones were biodiversity and erosion prevention. Furthermore, 58.83 percent of respondents cited soil degradation as the main environmental problem, followed by the loss of forest vegetation (23.08 percent) and water resources (19.23 percent). Fishing is a traditional activity in the area and is part of the daily life of families in the settlement, especially those who live near the lakes. The farmers considered that the main causes of the loss of and decrease in the quality of ES at the site are related to their production activities. In this sense, 63.83 percent of farmers reported burning as the main factor in soil degradation, 41.54 percent related deforestation to the reduction of lakes and rivers, and 71.54 percent indicated burning as the main factor in the loss of forest vegetation (Figure 4).

When asked about the most threatened services in the area, 90 percent of the services evaluated were considered highly threatened, with fishing identified by 86 percent of respondents as the most threatened ES (Figure 5).

Figure 4 Farmers' awareness about the importance of Ecosystem Services.

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 Farmers' awareness about the threats to the Ecosystem Services.

<!-- image -->

## Determinants in the Perception of Ecosystem Services

Based on socioeconomic characteristics, a PCA was performed (Figure 6). The three main components represented 67.9 percent of the total variability. The first axis represented 28.1 percent variability and was mainly related to the variables age, years of study (schooling), and income ( p &lt; 0.05). The second axis represented 23.1 percent of variability and was mainly related to the importance perception variables of ES (ESI) and of the threat to ES (EST; p &lt; 0.05). The third main component represented 16.71 percent of variability and was made up mainly of the variables income, ESI, and study ( p &lt; 0.05).

None of the variables was negatively correlated, but three groups of variables that correlate more strongly were identified: age and income, ESI and EST, and years of study with ES on human wellbeing (ESWB). The spatial distribution of the age classes showed an evident segmentation of people with regard to the variables studied. Young farmers are associated with a higher educational level and with the importance of two ES for well-being. Older farmers ( &gt; 46) are associated with higher income and perceived importance (ESI) and threat (EST) of two ES.

## Discussion

The Amazon biome in Brazil has undergone important alterations in land use and cover, mainly due to deforestation (Spracklen and Garcia-Carreras 2015; Silva et al. 2020; Leite-Filho et al. 2021; Marengo et al. 2022). The state of Maranh ~ ao, where the Diamante Negro settlement is located, has one of the highest levels of illegal deforestation in the country (Silva et al. 2020). The alterations in LULC in the Amazon have caused changes in climate and ES are in danger (Marengo et al. 2022).

Changes in LULC cause changes in ES. Farmers ' perception of the importance and threat of these services are relevant to fostering policies for the management and conservation of natural resources in agricultural landscapes. Figure 7 demonstrates this interrelationship. Smith and Sullivan (2014) highlighted that it is fundamental for the success of natural resource policies to understand the values and motivations of this important group of stakeholders.

The LULCC observed in the Diamante Negro SP is a local representation of the changes that have occurred regionally. The increase in areas under agricultural and livestock use contrasts with the diminutions in both secondary vegetation (forest) and bodies of water. A similar study identified a decrease in forest areas and an increase in cultivated areas (Mussa, Teka, and Mesfin 2017). In the case of Diamante Negro, the decreases in water bodies and forests could be caused by population growth, with expansion of the livestock area and with the intensification of the slash-and-burn system. The population increase intensifies land and soil use in the system (Jakovac et al. 2016; Kopittke et al. 2019), and with the low fertility of the region ' s soils (dos Santos et al. 2018), new areas such as riparian forest and forest are cleared for crops. Thus, the use dynamics and coverage changes alter ES due to the reduction of important components of the landscape, thus modifying its structure and function, and compromising human well-being (Munthali et al. 2019; Muleta, Kidane, and Bezie 2021). In addition to the aforementioned local factors, climate change might be exacerbating the degradation and loss of ES. In Maranh ~ ao, in the Eastern Amazon, 75 percent of the original forest cover has already been lost (Silva et al. 2020). Studies show that this region is one of the most vulnerable to climate change, and indicate a trend toward a decrease in rainfall accompanied by a greater number of dry days and an increase in temperature (Marengo, Torres, and

Figure 6 Socioeconomic data and ecosystem services perception. Note variables: time of study (STUDY), age, income in production (INC), perception of the importance of ecosystem services (ESI), perception of the threat of ecosystem services (EST), perception of the influence of ecosystem services on human well-being (ESWB).

<!-- image -->

Figure 7 Interrelationship between LULUC, perceptions of environmental services and natural resource management.

<!-- image -->

Alves 2017; Marengo et al. 2022). In general, previous studies point to the biodiversity loss, soil degradation, reduced agricultural income, and the decline of ES such as the provision of water resources as some of the main consequences of LULCC (Emmerson et al. 2016; Dibaba, Demissie, and Miegel 2020; Belete, Maryo, and Teka 2021). In the Brazilian Amazon, for example, deforestation produces rainfall diminution (Spracklen and GarciaCarreras 2015; Leite-Filho et al. 2021). In the Eastern Amazon -Cerrado transition region where agribusiness expansion accelerates and deforestation increases, dry seasons are longer, temperatures have increased, and the onset of rains is delayed (Marengo et al. 2022).

With the changing trends in land use and climate, food security and the maintenance of forests and their ES are at risk (Marengo et al. 2022). These alterations have a stronger impact on family farmers in the Amazon who depend on slash-andburn methods, as they have less institutional support and limited human resources (Lapola et al. 2011). In this sense, it is important to assess and understand the dynamics of LULCC to inform a new sociospatial dynamics based on sustainable soil-use practices (Munthali et al. 2019; Regasa, Nones, and Adeba 2021). In the case of farmers in Diamante Negro, where human and economic resources are limited and where changes in land use have affected the

provision of essential ES such as fishing and water resources, it is necessary to promote new alternatives for producing food that guarantee food security. With the intensification of slash-and-burn and ongoing climate change, it is a priority to create comprehensive public policies that allow the process of transition to more resilient systems, such as agroforestry, that can contribute to mitigating climate change and diminishing the vulnerability of farmers through income generation and ES conservation (Villa et al. 2020; Villa et al. 2021).

The results of this study indicate that fishing is perceived as the most important but also the most threatened ES. Fishing, despite not generating a significant share of income, represents one of the main ways of guaranteeing food security in the local context. Recent studies in the Amazon basin indicate that the deforestation of floodplains reduces the functional diversity of fishes on the local and regional scales (Arantes et al. 2018; Prestes et al. 2022) and that overexploitation and dams threaten this ES (Prestes et al. 2022).

The results suggest that the farmers from the middle and advanced age groups ( &gt; 46) were positively correlated with income and the perception of ES importance. Thus, we consider that the value perceived by more experienced farmers, retirees, and those with greater income in relation to the importance of natural resources is different from the younger ones. This could be because older farmers and their families have been subsisting their entire lives from the local natural resources, which might have made them more sensitive to the functions of the ES. The perceived importance of ES varies according to cultural, socioeconomic, and environmental conditions (Mengist et al. 2022). The VBN theory revealed that values and beliefs influence pro-environmental attitudes and behavior (Stern et al. 1999). Another recent study indicates that environmental perceptions are mediated by religious and spiritual aspects (Oliveira et al. 2017). Age (Xun et al. 2017) and schooling (Munthali et al. 2019) have also been identified as determinants of perception. Our survey shows that schooling was negatively correlated with the variables importance of ES and age, which in turn are related to years of farming experience. In contrast to the results presented earlier on the determinants of farmers ' perception of ES, similarly Page and Bellotti (2015) found no effect of gender, years of cultivation, age, education, owned or managed area, farm type, location, or gross income.

Information on the importance and threat to ES has considerable potential for environmental management policy formulation. Farmers ' awareness and perceptions about their own production practices and uses of natural resources can provide relevant contributions to social well-being. It is necessary to establish an environmental policy to encourage changes in land use and management and thus maintain ES. Rural development needs to be supported by the strength of local knowledge associated with policies for the management and conservation of natural resources.

## Conclusion

Agriculture and livestock expansion, the loss of forest cover, and the reduction of water bodies are the main LULCC. The changes resulting from agriculture based on slash-and-burn practices have affected the ES of provision, agriculture, and fishing, thereby influencing the quality of life of farmers in the Diamante Negro Juta  ı SP.

The perception of farmers about the local environment and the importance and threat of ES bring together knowledge that has the potential to guide policy aimed at reducing threats to ES and local development. Most of the ES in the region are perceived as threatened, with fisheries being the most endangered of all, indicating the need for water conservation policies and guidance on sustainable fishing activity or a reduction in pesticide use and the introduction of pollutants, siltation, or sedimentation intrusion or other potential factors affecting the health of the fishery. Finally, this work provides important information for the direct good practices and actions of the conservation of natural resources that can generate a new model of agricultural production to replace slash-and-burn agriculture, influencing the maintenance and quality of ES and farmers ' lives. /H17039

## Acknowledgments

Our sincere thanks go to the farmers for their generosity in sharing with us their perceptions and information that were of great importance to this research. We would also like to thank the reviewers for pertinent comments and suggestions that significantly improved the article.

## Funding

This work was funded by the Foundation to Support Scientific and Technological Research and Development of Maranh ~ ao. We are very grateful for their financial support of our work.

## Literature Cited

Arantes, C. C., K. O. Winemiller, M. Petrere, L. Castello, L. L. Hess, and C. E. Freitas. 2018. Relationships between forest cover and fish diversity in the Amazon

- River floodplain. Journal of Applied Ecology 55 (1):386 -95. doi: 10.1111/1365-2664.12967.
- Belete, F., M. Maryo, and A. Teka. 2021. Land use/land cover dynamics and perception of the local communities in Bita district, south western Ethiopia. International Journal of River Basin Management . Advance online publication. doi: 10.1080/15715124.2021.1938092.
- Blayac, T., S. Math  e, H. Rey-Valette, and P. Fontaine. 2014. Perceptions of the services provided by pond fish farming in Lorraine (France). Ecological Economics 108: 115 -23. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2014.10.007.
- Boyd, J., and S. Banzafh. 2007. What are ecosystem services? The need for standardized environmental accounting units. Ecological Indicators 63 (2 -3):616 -26.
- Brazil. 2014. Executive Power-Decree No. 8,381, of December 29, 2014. Accessed March 2017. https://legislacao.presidencia. gov.br/atos/?tipo=DECandnumero=8381andano=2014andato= 842g3aU5UNVpWT959.
- Celentano, D., G. X. Rousseau, V. L. Engel, C. L. Fac ¸anha, E. M. de Oliveira, and E. G. Moura. 2014. Perceptions of environmental change and use of traditional knowledge to plan riparian forest restoration with relocated communities in Alc ^ antara, Eastern Amazon. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 10 (1):1 -14. doi: 10.1186/1746-4269-10-11.
- Celentano, D., G. X. Rousseau, V. L. Engel, M. Zelaray  an, E. C. Oliveira, A. C. M. Araujo, and E. G. Moura. 2017. Degradation of riparian forest affects soil properties and ecosystem services provision in Eastern Amazon of Brazil. Land Degradation &amp; Development 28 (2):482 -93. doi: 10.1002/ldr.2547.
- Costanza, R., R. d ' Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. Grasso, B. Hannon, K. Limburg, S. Naeem, R. V. O ' Neill, J. Paruelo, et al. 1997. The value of the world ' s ecosystem services and natural capital. Nature 387 (6630):253 -60. doi: 10.1038/387253a0.
- De Ara  ujo, F. P., E. R. Porto, and M. S. L. da Silva. 2004. Ebb agriculture: A crop option for the dry season. Embrapa Semi  arido Technical Communication (INFOTECA-E). https://ainfo.cnptia.embrapa.br/digital/bitstream/CPATSA/30063/1/INT56.pdf
- De Groot, R., M. A. Wilson, and R. M. J. Boumans. 2002. A typology for the classification, description and valuation of ecosystem functions, goods and services. Ecological Economics 41 (3):393 -408. doi: 10.1016/S09218009(02)00089-7.
- De Janvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2010. Agricultural growth and poverty reduction: Additional evidence. The World Bank Research Observer 25 (1):1 -20. doi: 10.1093/wbro/ lkp015.
- Dibaba, W. T., T. A. Demissie, and K. Miegel. 2020. Drivers and implications of land use/land cover dynamics in Finchaa catchment, northwestern Ethiopia. Land 9 (4):113. doi: 10.3390/land9040113.
- dos Santos, C. C., A. Souza de Lima Ferraz, Jr., S. Oliveira S  a, J. Andr  es Mu ~ noz Guti  errez, H. Braun, M. Sarrazin, M. Brossard, and T. Desjardins. 2018. Soil carbon stock and plinthosol fertility in smallholder land-use systems in the Eastern Amazon, Brazil. Carbon Management 9 (6):655 -64. doi: 10.1080/17583004.2018.1530026.
- Emmerson, M., M. B. Morales, J. J. O ~ nate, P. Bat  ary, F. Berendse, J. Liira, T. Aavik, I. Guerrero, R. Bommarco,
- S. Eggers, et al. 2016. How agricultural intensification affects biodiversity and ecosystem services. Advances in Ecological Research 55:43 -97.
- Fisher, B., R. K. Turner, and P. Morling. 2009. Defining and classifying ecosystem services for decision making. Ecological Economics 68 (3):643 -53. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2008.09.014.
- Fontana, V., A. Radtke, V. B. Fedrigotti, U. Tappeiner, E. Tasser, S. Zerbe, and T. Buchholz. 2013. Comparing land-use alternatives: Using the ecosystem services concept to define a multi-criteria decision analysis. Ecological Economics 93:128 -36. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2013.05.007.
- Freitas, M. W. D., J. R. de Santos, and D. S. Alves. 2013. Land-use and land-cover change processes in the upper Uruguay Basin: Linking environmental and socioeconomic. Landscape Ecology 28 (2):311 -27. doi: 10.1007/ s10980-012-9838-9.
- Harrison, P. A., M. Vandewalle, M. T. Sykes, P. M. Berry, R. Bugter, F. de Bello, C. K. Feld, U. Grandin, R. Harrington, J. R. Haslett, et al. 2010. Identifying and prioritising services in European terrestrial and freshwater ecosystems. Biodiversity and Conservation 19 (10): 2791 -2821. doi: 10.1007/s10531-010-9789-x.
- Hasan, S. S., L. Zhen, L. M. G. Miah, T. Ahamed, and A. Samie. 2020. Impact of land use change on ecosystem services: A review. Environmental Development 34: 100527. doi: 10.1016/j.envdev.2020.100527.
- Hein, L., K. van Koppen, R. S. de Groot, and E. C. van Ierland. 2006. Spatial scales, stakeholders and the valuation of ecosystem services. Ecological Economics 57 (2): 209 -28. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.04.005.
- IBGE. 2010. Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics: Demographic census. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: IBGE.
- INCRA. 2006. National Institute for Agrarian Reform and State Association for Agricultural Cooperation, Basic environmental project of the Settlement Diamante Negro Jutay. Igarap  e do Meio/Monc ¸ ~ ao, Brazil: INCRA.
- INPE. 2016. National Institute for Space Research, Monitoring of forest cover in the Amazon by Prodes, Deter, Degrad and Burned satellite systems. S ~ ao Jos  e dos Campos, Brazil: INPE. Accessed November 16, 2016. http://www.inpe.gov.br.www.obt.inpe.br/prodes/ inex.php
- Jakovac, C. C., L. D. Dutrieux, L. Siti, M. Pe ~ na Claros, and F. Bongers. 2017. Spatial and temporal dynamics of shifting cultivation in the Middle-Amazonas River: Expansion and intensification. PLoS ONE 12 (7): e0181092. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181092.
- Jakovac, C. C., M. Pe ~ na-Claros, T. W. Kuyper, and F. Bongers. 2015. Loss of secondary-forest resilience by land-use intensification in the Amazon. Journal of Ecology 103 (1):67 -77. doi: 10.1111/1365-2745.12298.
- Jakovac, C. C., M. Pe ~ na-Claros, R. C. Mesquita, F. Bongers, and T. W. Kuyper. 2016. Swiddens under transition: Consequences of agricultural intensification in the Amazon. Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment 218:116 -25. doi: 10.1016/j.agee.2015.11.013.
- Jendoubi, D., M. S. Hossain, M. Giger, J. Tomi  cevi  cDubljevi  c, M. Ouessar, H. Liniger, and C. I. Speranza. 2020. Local livelihoods and land users ' perceptions of land degradation in northwest Tunisia. Environmental

- Development 33:100507. doi: 10.1016/j.envdev.2020. 100507.
- Kassambara, A. 2017. Practical guide to principal component methods in R: PCA, M (CA), FAMD, MFA, HCPC, factoextra (2). Sthda.
- Kassambara, A., and F. Mundt. 2020. Factoextra: Extract and visualize the results of multivariate data analyses. R Package Version 1.0.7. https://CRAN.R-project.org/ package=factoextra
- Ketema, H., W. Wei, A. Legesse, Z. Wolde, H. Temesgen, F. Yimer, and A. Mamo. 2020. Quantifying smallholder farmers ' managed land use/land cover dynamics and its drivers in contrasting agro-ecological zones of the East African rift. Global Ecology and Conservation 21: e00898. doi: 10.1016/j.gecco.2019.e00898.
- Kopittke, P. M., N. W. Menzies, P. Wang, B. A. McKenna, and E. Lombi. 2019. Soil and the intensification of agriculture for global food security. Environment International 132:105078. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2019. 105078.
- Kumar, P. N. P., N. P. Singh, and V. C. Mathur. 2006. Sustainable agriculture and rural livelihoods: A synthesis. Agricultural Economics Research Review 19:1 -22.
- Lapola, D. M., R. Schaldach, J. Alcamo, A. Bondeau, S. Msangi, J. A. Priess, R. Silvestrini, and B. S. SoaresFilho. 2011. Impacts of climate change and the end of deforestation on land use in the Brazilian legal Amazon. Earth Interactions 15 (16):1 -29. doi: 10.1175/2010EI333.1.
- Le, S., J. Josse, and F. Husson. 2008. FactoMineR: An R package for ultivariate analysis. Journal of Statistical Software 25 (1):1 -18. doi: 10.18637/jss.v025.i01.
- Leite-Filho, A. T., B. S. Soares-Filho, J. L. Davis, G. M. Abrah ~ ao, and J. B € orner. 2021. Deforestation reduces rainfall and agricultural revenues in the Brazilian Amazon. Nature Communications 12 (1):1 -7. doi: 10. 1038/s41467-021-22840-7.
- Maranh ~ ao. 2002. Atlas of Maranhao: State management of economic planning and development, geoprocessing laboratory -UEMA. 2nd ed. S ~ ao Lu  ı s, Brazil: GEPLAN.
- Marengo, J. A., J. C. Jimenez, J. C. Espinoza, A. P. Cunha, and L. E. Arag ~ ao. 2022. Increased climate pressure on the agricultural frontier in the Eastern Amazonia -Cerrado transition zone. Scientific Reports 12 (1):1 -10. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-04241-4.
- Marengo, J. A., R. R. Torres, and L. M. Alves. 2017. Drought in northeast Brazil -Past, present, and future. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 129 (3 -4):1189 -1200. doi: 10.1007/s00704-016-1840-8.
- MEA. 2005. Ecosystem and human well-being: Synthesis . Washington, DC: Island.
- Mengist, W., T. Soromessa, G. L. Feyisa, and G. D. Jenerette. 2022. Socio-environmental determinants of the perceived value of moist afromontane forest ecosystem services in Kaffa Biosphere Reserve, Ethiopia. Forest Policy and Economics 136:102688. doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2021. 102688.
- Miot, H. A. 2011. Sample size in clinical and experimental studies. Jornal Vascular Brasileiro 10 (4):275 -78. doi: 10. 1590/S1677-54492011000400001.
- Muleta, T. T., M. Kidane, and A. Bezie. 2021. The effect of land use/land cover change on ecosystem services
- values of Jibat forest landscape, Ethiopia. GeoJournal 86 (5):2209 -25. doi: 10.1007/s10708-020-10186-4.
- Munthali, M. G., N. Davis, A. M. Adeola, J. O. Botai, J. M. Kamwi, H. L. Chisale, and O. Orimoogunje. 2019. Local perception of drivers of land-use and landcover change dynamics across Dedza district, Central Malawi region. Sustainability 11 (3):832. doi: 10.3390/ su11030832.
- Mussa, M., H. Teka, and Y. Mesfin. 2017. Land use/cover change analysis and local community perception towards land cover change in the lowland of Bale rangelands, southeast Ethiopia. International Journal of Biodiversity and Conservation 9 (12):363 -72.
- Oliveira, R. C. D. S., U. P. Albuquerque, T. L. L. da Silva, W.S. Ferreira J  unior, L. D. S. Chaves, and E. D. L. Ara  ujo. 2017. Religiousness/spirituality do not necessarily matter: Effect on risk perception and adaptive strategies in the semi-arid region of NE Brazil. Global Ecology and Conservation 11:125 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.gecco.2017.05.004.
- Paetzold, A., P. H. Warren, and L. L. Maltby. 2010. A framework for assessing ecological quality based on ecosystem services. Ecological Complexity 7 (3):273 -81. doi: 10.1016/j.ecocom.2009.11.003.
- Page, G., and B. Bellotti. 2015. Farmers value on-farm ecosystem services as important, but what are the impediments to participation in PES schemes? Science of the Total Environment 515 -516:12 -19. doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.02.029.
- Paudyal, K., H. Baral, B. Burkhard, S. P. Bhandari, and R. J. Keenan. 2015. Participatory assessment and mapping of ecosystem services in a data-poor region: Case study of community-managed forests in Central Nepal. Ecosystem Services 13:81 -92. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoser.2015. 01.007.
- Perrings, C., A. Duraiappah, A. Larigauderie, and H. Mooney. 2011. The biodiversity and ecosystem services science -policy interface. Science 331 (6021):1139 -40. doi: 10.1126/science.1202400.
- Pham, L. V. C., and C. Smith. 2014. Drivers of agricultural sustainability in developing countries: A review. Environment Systems and Decisions 34 (2):326 -41. doi: 10. 1007/s10669-014-9494-5.
- Prestes, L., R. Barthem, A. Mello-Filho, E. Anderson, S. B. Correa, T. B. D. Couto, E. Venticinque, B. Forsberg, C. Ca ~ nas, B. Bentes, et al. 2022. Proactively averting the collapse of Amazon fisheries based on three migratory flagship species. PLoS ONE 17 (3):e0264490. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0264490.
- R Core Team. 2021. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna. Austria. https://www.R-project.org
- Regasa, M. S., M. Nones, and D. Adeba. 2021. A review on land use and land cover change in Ethiopian basins. Land 10 (6):585. doi: 10.3390/land10060585.
- Rego, A. K. C., and O. R. Kato. 2018. Slash and burn agriculture and agroecological alternatives in the Amazon. Novos Cadernos NAEA 20 (3):203 -24.
- Silva, C. H., Jr., D. Celentano, G. X. Rousseau, E. G. de Moura, I. v Deursen Varga, C. Martinez, and M. B. Martins. 2020. Amazon forest on the edge of collapse in the Maranh ~ ao State, Brazil. Land Use Policy 97:104806. doi: 10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.104806.

Singh, M., N. D. Kalra, D. Chakraborty, K. Kamble, D. Barman, S. Sah, R. B. Mittal, and S. Pandey. 2008. Biophysical and socioeconomic characterization of a water-stressed area and simulating agri-production estimates and land use planning under normal and extreme climatic events: A case study. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment 142 (1 -3):97 -108. doi: 10.1007/s10661007-9911-z.

Smith, H. F., and C. A. Sullivan. 2014. Ecosystems services within agricultural landscapes -Farmers ' perceptions. Ecological Economics 98:72 -80. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolecon. 2013.12.008.

Spracklen, D. V., and L. J. G. R. L. Garcia-Carreras. 2015. The impact of Amazonian deforestation on Amazon Basin rainfall. Geophysical Research Letters 42 (21):9546 -52. doi: 10.1002/2015GL066063.

Stern, P. C., T. Dietz, T. Abel, G. A. Guagnano, and L. Kalof. 1999. A value -belief -norm theory of support for social movements: The case of environmentalism. Human Ecology Review 6 (2):81 -97.

Tallis, H., and S. Polasky. 2009. Mapping and valuing ecosystem services as an approach for conservation and natural-resource management. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1162 (1):265 -83. doi: 10.1111/j.17496632.2009.04152.x.

TEEB. 2010. The economics of ecosystems and biodiversity: Ecological and economic foundations . London: Earthscan.

Tuan, Y. F. 2012. Topophilia: A study of the perception, attitudes and values of the environment . New York: Columbia University Press.

Vihervaara, P., M. Ronka, and M. Walls. 2010. Trends in ecosystem service research: Early steps and current drivers. Ambio 39 (4):314 -24. doi: 10.1007/s13280-0100048-x.

Villa, P. M., S. V. Martins, S. N. de Oliveira Neto, A. C. Rodrigues, E. P. Hern  andez, and D. G. Kim. 2020. Policy forum: Shifting cultivation and agroforestry in the Amazon: Premises for REDD þ . Forest Policy and Economics 118:102217. doi: 10.1016/j.forpol.2020.102217.

Villa, P. M., A. C. Rodrigues, S. V. Martins, S. N. de Oliveira Neto, A. G. Laverde, and A. Riera-Seijas. 2021. Reducing intensification by shifting cultivation through sustainable climate-smart practices in tropical forests: A review in the context of UN decade on ecosystem restoration. Current Research in Environmental Sustainability 3: 100058. doi: 10.1016/j.crsust.2021.100058.

Wainger, L., and M. Mazzotta. 2011. Realizing the potential of ecosystem services: A framework for relating ecological changes to economic benefits. Environmental Management 48 (4):710 -33. doi: 10.1007/s00267-0119726-0.

Xun, F., Y. Hu, L. Lv, and J. Tong. 2017. Farmers ' awareness of ecosystem services and the associated policy implications. Sustainability 9 (9):1612. doi: 10.3390/ su9091612.

Zhao, Q., Z. Wen, S. Chen, S. Ding, and M. Zhang. 2020. Quantifying land use/land cover and landscape pattern changes and impacts on ecosystem service international. Journal of Environmental Health Research 17 (1):126.

CE  ALIA CRISTINE DOS SANTOS is Professor of Human Geography at the Federal University of

Maranh ~ ao-Brazil, S ~ ao Luis, Maranh ~ ao, Brazil. E-mail: cealya6@gmail.com. Her research interests are in the fields of and geography and environmental issues, environmental tensors, soil carbon stock, socioeconomic and environmental analysis in rural settlements, and environmental services.

JHONATAN ANDR  ES MU ~ NOZ GUTI  ERREZ is a PhD Student in Agroecology at the State University of Maranh ~ ao, S ~ ao Luis, Maranh ~ ao, Brazil. E-mail: jhonatanmunoz.gu@gmail.com. He has experience in soil macrofauna, agroecological production, rural extension, ecosystem services, climate change mitigation, conservation, management and sustainable use of natural resources, biodiversity assessment, and environmental education activities.

MICHEL BROSSARD is Research Director at the Institut de Recherche pour le D  eveloppement (IRD), Marseille, France. E-mail: michel.brossard@ird.fr. He works mainly on the following themes: tropical soils, organic matter, phosphorus, oxisols, and soil fauna.

THIERRY DESJARDINS is a Researcher at the Institut de Recherche pour le D  eveloppement (IRD), Marseille, France. E-mail: thierry.desjardins@ird.fr. He has experience in agronomy, with emphasis on soil science. His research is mainly on the following themes: organic matter, isotopic geochemistry, Brazilian Amazon, deforestation, and pastures.

ALTAMIRO SOUZA DE LIMA FERRAZ, JR. is Professor in the Graduate Program in Agroecology at the State University of Maranh ~ ao-Brazil, S ~ ao Luis, Maranh ~ ao, Brazil. E-mail: altamiro.ferrazjr.junior@gmail.com. He develops work in the area of agroecology, with an emphasis on sustainable agroecosystems, acting mainly on the following themes: agroforestry systems, organic production of vegetables, and use of industrial waste in agriculture.

## Appendix A

## Question  ario de Caracterizac ¸ ~ ao Socioecon ^ omica e Ambiental -Assentamento Diamante Negro Juta  ı

## 1. INFORMAC ¸ ~ OES GERAIS

- 1.1 Nome do Produtor Rural:
- 1.2 Nome da Comunidade:
- 1.3 Idade [anos]:
- 1.4 Cor/Rac ¸a

Branco [] Negro [] Ind 

- ı gena [] Mestic ¸o []
- 1.5 Sexo:

Feminino [] Masculino []

- 1.6 Local de nascimento:
- 1.7 Tempo que mora no local:
- 1.8 Estado civil:

Solteiro[a] [] Casado[a] [] Separado[a] [] Vi  uvo[a] [] Uni ~ ao est  avel []

- 1.9 Escolaridade:

Analfabeto []

Alfabetizac ¸ ~ ao Incompleta []

## 2. INFORMAC ¸ ~ OES DE PRODUC ¸ ~ AO

| 1 a ano Ensino Fundamental [] 2 a ano Ensino Fundamental [] 3 a ano Ensino Fundamental [] 4 a ano Ensino Fundamental [] 5 a ano Ensino Fundamental []   | 2.1  Area total da propriedade rural [h  a]                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                                                                                                         | 2.2 Valor investido na produc ¸ ~ ao                                                |
|                                                                                                                                                         | 2.3 Tipo de Agricultura                                                             |
|                                                                                                                                                         | 2.4 Produc ¸ ~ ao Agr  ı cola                                                                                     |
| 6 a ano Ensino Fundamental []                                                                                                                           | Produtos                                                                            |
| 7 a ano Ensino Fundamental []                                                                                                                           |  Area de plantio                                                                                     |
| 8 a ano Ensino Fundamental []                                                                                                                           | Quantidade/                                                                         |
| 9 a ano Ensino Fundamental []                                                                                                                           | Destino de Produc ¸ ~ ao: Consumo/Venda                                             |
| 1 a ano Ensino M  edio []                                                                                                                                                         | Prec ¸o [R$]                                                                        |
| 2 a ano Ensino M  edio []                                                                                                                                                         | 2.5. Voc ^ e usa adubo? [] Sim [] N ~ ao                                            |
| 3 a ano Ensino M  edio []                                                                                                                                                         | Quantidade:                                                                         |
| Ensino Superior Completo                                                                                                                                | Modelo                                                                              |
| [] Ensino Superior Incompleto []                                                                                                                        | Custo                                                                               |
| P  os-Graduac ¸ ~ ao                                                                                                                                                         | 2.6. Voc ^ e usa agrot  oxicos? [] Sim [] N ~ ao                                                                                     |
| 1.10 N  umero de Filhos:                                                                                                                                                         | Quantidade:                                                                         |
| 1.11 Sexo dos Filhos:                                                                                                                                   | Modelo                                                                              |
| Masculino []                                                                                                                                            | Custo                                                                               |
| Idade []                                                                                                                                                | 2.7 Pr  aticas de manejo agroecol  ogico adotadas:                                                                                     |
| Feminino []                                                                                                                                             | Uso de res  ı duos de colheita                                                                                     |
| Idade []                                                                                                                                                | Aplicac ¸ ~ ao de adubo org ^ anicorotac ¸ ~ ao de                                  |
| 1.12 Escolaridade                                                                                                                                       | colheitaspolicultura                                                                |
| dos Filho [S]: 1.13 N  umero de membros da []                                                                                                                                                         | Total: []                                                                           |
| Fam  ı lia 1.14 Estrutura familiar: Extens ~ ao Familiar [] Fam  ı lia []                                                                                                                                                         | 2.8 Uso de maquin  ario na produc ¸ ~ ao agr  ı cola? Sim [] N ~ ao                                                                                     |
| N  ucleo                                                                                                                                                         | 2.9 Frequ ^ encia de uso de m  aquinaspreparac ¸ ~ ao do solo Plantio                                                                                     |
| 1.15 Tipo de Moradia [material predominante]: Palha [] Taipa coberta de palha [] Taipa coberta de telha [] Alvenaria []                                 | Fertilizac ¸ ~ aoaplicac ¸ ~ ao de pesticidas Colheita                              |
| Alvenaria com reboco e sem piso [] Alvenaria com reboco e piso [] lvenaria sem reboco e com piso []                                                     | Total 2.10 Criar animais [] Sim [] N                                                |
| Condic ¸ ~ oes de moradia: Pr  oprio [] Alugado [] Emprestado [] Outros []                                                                                                                                                         | ~ ao 2.11  Area destinada  a pecu  aria [existe] Animal                                                                                     |
| 1.16                                                                                                                                                    |  area de criac ¸ ~ ao                                                                                     |
| 1.17. Agua tratada: Sim [] N ~ ao [] 1.18 Alternativa para o n ~ ao acesso  a agua tratada: Poc ¸o ou nascente [] Carro-pipa []  Agua                                                                                                                                                         | Destino de produc ¸ ~ ao Prec ¸o [R$]                                               |
| da chuva armazenada [] Rios, ac ¸udes, lagos e                                                                                                          | Consumo - Sim [] ] N ~ ao [] Venda - Sim [] N ~ ao [] Quantidade                    |
| igarap  es [] Tratamento da  agua n ~ ao pot  avel coletada pelos moradores para consumo                                                                                                                                                         | Quantidade 2.12 Pesca [] Sim [] N ~ ao                                              |
| 1.19 Filtrada [] Fervida [] Hipoclorito de s  odio []                                                                                                                                                         | Tipos de peixes mais pescados hoje: Peixedestino de pesca Prec ¸o R$]               |
| Nenhum [] Outros []                                                                                                                                     | Consumo - Sim [] N ~ ao []                                                          |
| 1.20 Destino do lixo: Coleta [] Enterrado [] Queimado                                                                                                   | Venda - Sim [] N ~ ao []                                                            |
| [] Rio ou                                                                                                                                               | Quantidade Quantidade                                                               |
| lago [] Depositado longe da moradia [] Consumo de equipamentos b  asicos e bens                                                                                                                                                         | 2.13. Recolhe e quebra o coco [] Sim [] N ~ ao Babac ¸u Valor destino da pesca [R$] |
| 1.21 dur  aveis: [condic ¸ ~ oes de compra]                                                                                                                                                         | Consumo - Sim [] N ~ ao [] Quant. Venda - Sim []                                    |
|                                                                                                                                                         | N ~ ao [] Valor                                                                     |
| Televis ~ ao [] Telefone celular [] Radio [] Motocicleta [] Geladeira [] Bicicleta [] Fog ~ ao []                                                       | Am ^ endoa Azeite                                                                   |
| Total []                                                                                                                                                | Carv ~ ao                                                                           |
| []                                                                                                                                                      |                                                                                     |
| Pescador                                                                                                                                                | 2.14 Composic ¸ ~ ao da                                                             |
| 1.22 Trabalho Principal: Agricultor []                                                                                                                  | renda familiar mensal: Valor da atividade agr  ı cola                                                                                     |
| Quebradeira [] Outro [] 1.23                                                                                                                            | ao                                                                                  |
| Organizac ¸ ~ ao que participa: Sindicato []                                                                                                            | Valor da atividade de criac ¸                                                       |
|                                                                                                                                                         | ~ Valor da atividade de pesca                                                       |
| Cooperativa [] Col ^ onia []                                                                                                                            | Valor da extrac ¸ ~ ao do babac                                                     |
| Associac ¸ ~ ao []                                                                                                                                      | ¸u                                                                                  |

Valor dos programas sociais Valor de outra fonte [n ~ ao agr  ı cola] Renda familiar mensal total 2.15 Renda familiar mensal: Menos de 0,5 sal  ario m  ı nimo 0,5 a menos de 1 sal  ario m  ı nimo 1 sal  ario m  ı nimo 1 a menos de 1,5 sal  ario m  ı nimo ı

De 1,5 a menos de 2 sal  arios m  nimosmais 2 sal- arios m  ı nimos

## 3. PERCEPC ¸ ~ AO DOS PRODUTORES RURAIS EM RELAC ¸ ~ AO AOS SERVIC ¸OS AMBIENTAIS DO ASSENTAMENTO DIAMANTE NEGRO

3.1 Na sua opini ~ ao qual  e o maior problema ambiental local?

Degradac ¸ ~ ao da Produtividade do Solo [] Degradac ¸ ~ ao do Rio e lagos []

Degradac ¸ ~ ao da Vegetac ¸ ~ ao [] Degradac ¸ ~ ao da Biodiversidade animais e plantas []

3.2 Na sua opini ~ ao qual  e a principal causa da Degradac ¸ ~ ao da Produtividade do Solo

Uso de agrot  oxico [] Reduc ¸ ~ ao do pousio [] Uso do fogo []

3.3 Na sua opini ~ ao qual  e a causa da Degradac ¸ ~ ao Rios e lagos?

Uso de agrot  oxico [] Reduc ¸ ~ ao da vegetac ¸ ~ ao entorno [] Aterramento [

3.4 Na sua opini ~ ao qual  e a causa da Degradac ¸ ~ ao da ~

Desmatamento [] Queimadas [] Retirada de

Vegetac ¸ ao? madeira []

3.1 Classificac ¸ ~ ao e ameac ¸as aos servic ¸os ambientais Muito baixo [0 -1] MB Baixo [2 -3] B Mais ou menos [4 -6] MM Alto [7 -8] A Muito Alta [9 -10] MA

## Classificar a Import ^ ancia destes Servic ¸os Ambientais

Fornecer alimentos Pesca Produzir  agua limpa Proporcionar sombra Controle natural de pragas Conservac ¸ ~ ao dos rios e lagos Prevenir a eros ~ ao do solo Diversidade de plantas e animais Beleza da Paisagem Recreacionais

## Classificar a Ameac ¸a a estes Servic ¸os Ambientais

Fornecer alimentos

Pesca

Produzir  agua limpa

Proporcionar sombra Controle natural de pragas Conservac ¸ ~ ao dos rios e lagos Prevenir a eros ~ ao do solo Diversidade de plantas e animais

Beleza da Paisagem

Recreacionais

## Relac ¸ ~ oes entre Servic ¸os Ambientais e Bem-estar Humano

## Material b  asico para uma boa vida

Adquirir Sustento

Aquisic ¸ ~ ao de Alimentos saud  aveis

Abrigo [moradia]

Acesso a bens [poder de compra]

## Sa  ude

Sentir-se saud  avel Sentindo-se bem

## Boas relac ¸ ~ oes sociais

Coes ~ ao social [uni ~ ao] Respeito m  utuo Solidariedade

## Seguranc ¸a

Seguranc ¸a pessoal

## Appendix B

<!-- image -->

## Termo de Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido -

TCLE Esclarecimentos Prezado (a) Senhor (a)

Voc ^ e est  a sendo convidado a participar da pesquisa: Servic ¸os Ambientais Fornecidos pelo solo em Diferentes Sistemas de Uso e Ocupac ¸ ~ ao no Projeto de Assentamento Diamante Negro Juta  ı , Baixada Maranhense, que tem como pesquisador

respons  avel a Profa. Ce  alia Cristine dos Santos doutoranda em Agroecologia pela Universidade Estadual do Maranh ~ ao .

A pesquisa busca avaliar a manutenc ¸ ~ ao de servic ¸os ambientais fornecidos pelo solo em diferentes sistemas de uso e ocupac ¸ ~ ao no Assentamento Diamante Negro, na Baixada Maranhense por meio, do armazenamento de carbono e nitrog ^ enio no solo, da fertilidade e produtividade agr  ı cola e da caracterizac ¸ ~ ao socioecon ^ omica da  area, que ser  a realizada mediante a aplicac ¸ ~ ao de question  arios.

A falta de estudos sobre servic ¸os ambientais do solo no espac ¸o agr  ario maranhense, com ^ enfase ao armazenamento de carbono e nitrog ^ enio motivaram a pesquisa, bem como a possibilidade de construir alternativas e colaborar com proposic ¸ ~ oes para elucidac ¸ ~ ao de problemas socioambientais na  area de estudo. A import ^ ancia da investigac ¸ ~ ao vincula-se ao fato de proporcionar um maior conhecimento deste espac ¸o e a escolha de modelos vi  aveis de gest ~ ao dos solos.

Caso voc ^ e queira participar voc ^ e fornecer  a informac ¸ ~ oes que ser ~ ao registradas em question  ario cuja durac ¸ ~ ao ser  a de aproximadamente 20 minutos, com perguntas relacionadas a situac ¸ ~ ao ambiental, social e econ ^ omica. As informac ¸ ~ oes obtidas ser ~ ao trabalhadas por um software adequado e ser ~ ao apresentados no formato de gr  aficos e tabelas no intuito de caracterizar a realidade socioecon ^ omica local compondo um cap  ı tulo da tese de doutorado.

Voc ^ e ser  a questionado a respeito do tema em estudo, e  e m  ı nima ou praticamente inexistente a previs ~ ao de riscos referentes a execuc ¸ ~ ao desta investigac ¸ ~ ao. Conv  em destacar que n ~ ao haver  a nenhum tipo de pagamento ou gratificac ¸ ~ ao financeira pela sua participac ¸ ~ ao. Contudo o pesquisado tem direito de pleitear indenizac ¸ ~ ao em caso de danos decorrentes de sua participac ¸ ~ ao na pesquisa.

Em qualquer etapa da pesquisa o participante poder  a receber esclarecimentos adicionais que forem necess  arios. O Pesquisado (a) selecionada poder  a recusarse a participar ou retirar-se da pesquisa em qualquer etapa, sem penalidade, constrangimento ou preju  ı zo aos mesmos.  E garantido o sigilo para assegurar a privacidade dos sujeitos quanto aos dados confidenciais envolvidos na pesquisa. As informac ¸ ~ oes registradas ser ~ ao usadas para fins exclusivamente acad ^ emicocient  ı ficos e apresentados na forma de tese ou artigo cient  ı fico, n ~ ao sendo utilizados para qualquer fim comercial. O material da pesquisa ser  a armazenado por um per  ı odo de 5 anos. Este Termo  e emitido em duas vias assinados pelo pesquisado e pelo pesquisador.

## Consentimento Livre e Esclarecido

Eu,\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_, assino o termo de consentimento, ap  os esclarecimento, sobre o modo de realizac ¸ ~ ao da pesquisa, os riscos e benef  ı cios desta, concordo com os objetivos e condic ¸ ~ oes da realizac ¸ ~ ao da pesquisa ' Servic ¸os Ambientais Fornecidos pelo solo em Diferentes Sistemas de Uso e Ocupac ¸ ~ ao no Projeto de Assentamento Diamante Negro Juta  ı , Baixada Maranhense ' , permitindo, tamb  em, que os resultados deste estudo sejam divulgados sem identificar os participantes.

Moc ¸ ~ ao -MA, \_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

## Assinatura do participante da pesquisa

D  uvida ou maiores esclarecimentos, entrar em contato com o respons  avel pelo estudo:

Ce  alia Cristine dos Santos

Email: cealya@hotmail.com Fone: (98) 98164-4061

PPGAPrograma de P  os-Graduac ¸ ~ ao em Agroecologia

Universidade Estadual do Maranh ~ ao

Agroecologia, Cidade Universit  aria Paulo VI, Tirirical, S ~ ao Lu  ı s (MA).

Email: agroecologiauema@gmail.com Fone: (98) 3276-9378

## Declarac ¸ ~ ao do Pesquisador Respons  avel

Declaro que assumo a completa responsabilidade de cumprir os procedimentos metodol  ogicos e direitos que foram esclarecidos e assegurados ao participante da pesquisa intitulada Servic ¸os Ambientais Fornecidos pelo solo em Diferentes Sistemas de Uso e Ocupac ¸ ~ ao no Projeto de Assentamento Diamante Negro Juta  ı , Baixada Maranhense bem como garantir sigilo da identidade do mesmo.

Declaro ainda estar ciente que na inobserv ^ ancia do compromisso assumido estarei infringindo as normas e diretrizes estabelecidos pela Resoluc ¸ ~ ao 466/12 do Conselho Nacional de Sa  ude -CNS, que regulamenta as pesquisas envolvendo o ser humano.

S ~ ao Lu  ı s (MA) \_\_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_\_.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Assinatura do pesquisador respons  avel