<!-- image -->

## Annals of the American Association of Geographers

ISSN: 2469-4452 (Print) 2469-4460 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/raag21

## Nature, Agriculture, and Black Space-Making in Serra dos Tapes, Brazil

## Gabriela Rodrigues Gois

To cite this article: Gabriela Rodrigues Gois (2023) Nature, Agriculture, and Black SpaceMaking in Serra dos Tapes, Brazil, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, 113:7, 1589-1598, DOI: 10.1080/24694452.2022.2125361

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/24694452.2022.2125361

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 18 Oct 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 398

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Nature, Agriculture, and Black Space-Making in Serra dos Tapes, Brazil

Gabriela Rodrigues Gois

Instituto de Geograf  ı a, Pontificia Universidad Cat  olica de Chile, Chile

In this work, I focus on how Quilombolas in southern Brazil create territorial conceptions and practices. Contemporary quilombos constitute complex forms of social organization composed of different collectivities and political subjectivities whose ancestors resisted colonial slavery by creating free communities in urban and rural spaces. In Serra dos Tapes, rural Black Quilombola communities have struggled with geographic dispossession, socioeconomic inequalities, and everyday racism. At the same time, they have created spacemaking practices, thinking of their territory as a lived space. Agriculture plays an essential role in this process, articulating knowledge, creativity, and a unique relationship to nature. Black people in Serra dos Tapes consider the cultivation and their relation to nature meaningful in the constitution of their identities, food security, and autonomy. Results of this study were gained through the life history method. Taking Quilombolas ' practices, narratives, and trajectories seriously in their political and epistemological importance, this article aims to offer some insights to advance discussions concerning the entanglement of race, nature, and environment within geographical studies. Key Words: Black geographies, marronage, nature, oral history, quilombos.

A fter the abolition of slavery in 1888, Black people in Brazil continued to carve out spaces of resistance through art, religion, agriculture, and political and intellectual mobilizations. Those practices have challenged the antiBlack racism that relates symbiotically to space production in the Brazilian context (Campos 2010; Bledsoe 2015). The current multiplicity and ubiquity of rural Black Quilombola communities in southern Brazil, a region popularly noted for German and Italian colonization, invites us to reflect on how agriculture and the relationship with nature can be meaningful in the construction and consolidation of Black spaces facing reality marked by systematic dispossessions and everyday racism.

Contemporary quilombos constitute complex forms of social organization composed of different collectivities and political subjectivities whose ancestors resisted colonial slavery by creating free communities in urban and rural spaces. 1 In Serra dos Tapes, these Black communities view agriculture as a means of connecting with their ancestors and as their primary form of social, economic, cultural, and territorial reproduction (Gois and Miguel 2019). In this article, I direct my attention to how Quilombolas in southern Brazil create territorial conceptions and practices. More specifically, I observe how agriculture - not only as a set of techniques but as an articulation of knowledge, practices, and creativity -assumes, in the quilombo, importance in the creation of spaces that oppose the logic of domination and exploitation of nature, as well as in the development of nonhegemonic territorialities (Sodr  e 2002; Escobar 2008). For this, I focus on the histories and narratives of Quilombolas in the Alto do Caix ~ ao community. Through the method of life histories (Riley and Harvey 2007; Scott 2019, 2020), I acknowledge the political and epistemological significance of the trajectories of people in Quilombo Alto do Caix ~ ao, as well as the narratives and interpretations they elaborate on in their personal and collective events and on the reality in which they live.

To advance the discussion, I rely on the reflections of intellectuals who contribute to the growth of Black geographies as a political, theoretical, and epistemological stance and as spatial practices, experiences, and expressions (B. Nascimento 1985, 2018, 2021; Sodr  e 2002; McKittrick 2006, 2013; Bledsoe 2015, 2017; Scott 2019, 2020 ). Scott (2020), for instance, helps me reflect on how personal and familial narratives navigating within Black communities can inform about space-making processes and their specificities within a particular social context. B. Nascimento (1985) challenged me to think about

the continuities of Quilombolas ' sociospatial practices over time and to read them dialectically, Sodr  e (2002) called my attention to the relationality and creativity of Black spatialities in Brazil. In light of the territorial experiences of the Quilombolas in Serra dos Tapes and within the interdisciplinary project of Black geographies or Geografias Negras , this article aims to advance hemispheric conversations about space, race, and nature.

## Serra Dos Tapes

Serra dos Tapes is a region in the state of Rio Grande do Sul, southern Brazil, which covers the mountainous areas of the municipalities of Pelotas, S ~ ao Lourenc ¸o do Sul, Morro Redondo, Canguc ¸u, Turuc ¸u, and Arroio do Padre (Salamoni et al. 2021). Currently, in this mountain range, there are agricultural colonies of German and Italian origin represented by family farmers -also known as Colonos -in varied socioeconomic situations (Salamoni and Waskievicz 2013). There are also many rural Black communities, some of them presently recognized by the Brazilian state as quilombo remnants (Pinheiro 2014).

Part of the history of this region -which has the city of Pelotas as its main urban center -dates back to Portuguese colonization throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and to colonial slavery employed in cattle raising and jerky meat ( charque ) production (Gutierrez 2001). The headquarters of colonial properties, and the main economic activities, were located in the lowlands, as the flat terrain facilitated the raising of cattle and the installation of jerky farms, or charqueadas (Salamoni and Waskievicz 2013). In the vicinity of the flatlands are the sierras -which officially belonged to Portuguese landowners but were not often explored by them -defined by the undulating relief and dense vegetation. The natural characteristics of these sierras made them geographic allies for people who wanted to escape from the forced labor and the violence imposed by the slavery system (Pinheiro 2014, 2016).

In this sense, the formation of rural Black Quilombola communities in Serra dos Tapes dates back to slavery but is not limited to it. B. Nascimento considered historical quilombos as a search for an own and independent life, during slavery but beyond it. She challenged us to think of

Quilombola ' s articulations as possibilities to conceive and build other forms of social and spatial relations (B. Nascimento 1985, 2018, 2021). This understanding proposed by Nascimento guides my discussion in this article.

In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Brazilian state implemented non-Iberian European colonization projects in Serra dos Tapes (Salamoni and Waskievicz 2013), which strained racial and territorial relations in the region (Rubert 2009). These projects stimulated an articulation between public and private colonization initiatives, as Portuguese settlers started to divide the lands into lots for commercialization (Grando 1989). Among the motivations for this new colonization project were the replacement of enslaved labor that, in a few decades, would be formally emancipated; the land occupation with the production of foodstuffs for internal supply; and the whitening of the population that was primarily Black (Santos 2002; Costa 2011).

The Southern region, specifically the state of Rio Grande do Sul, seeks to position itself as a fragment of Europe in Brazil, racially differentiating it from the rest of the country. This phenomenon is due to spatial, social, and cultural processes privileged by hegemonic history, which neglects the Black and Indigenous populations (Torres 1994). Paradoxically, Rio Grande do Sul has the largest Quilombola population in the Southern region (Fundac ¸ ~ ao Cultural Palmares 2021). The capital, Porto Alegre, is the city with the most significant number of urban quilombos in Brazil (Fundac ¸ ~ ao Cultural Palmares 2021). Of the 137 quilombos formally recognized in the Rio Grande do Sul, 20 percent are in Serra dos Tapes. Nevertheless, this region is noted for its Germanic and Italian cultural heritage. It has also been contemplated by rural development projects aimed at promoting colonial agricultural production and tourism focused on appreciating the landscape, the region ' s natural environment, and the Euro-descendant material and intangible patrimony.

Grisa and Schneider (2014) identified three ongoing generations of public policies for family farming in Brazil that emerged in different economic and political contexts. The first generation has an agricultural focus interested in expanding production, consolidating this type of agriculture in the market, and encouraging agrarian reform; the second generation has an assistance approach, creating social programs for underprivileged farmers; and the third aims

to build institutional markets to purchase family farming products, focusing on food security and sustainability. Those policies result from peasant political mobilizations for agrarian reform, better economic conditions, and quality of life in rural spaces (Aquino and Schneider 2015). Although being increasingly scarce due to the economic and political crisis that has affected Brazil since 2016, those public policies paved the way for strengthening family farming as a productive sector and as a normative and analytical social category in the Brazilian rural space (Grisa and Schneider 2014).

In Serra dos Tapes, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), rural extension workers, and cooperatives are responsible for mediating the interaction between the farmer and the state and executing the programs. Colonial family farming has been aided with rural credit programs, expanded its relations with industries, and changed its technical and productive bases. Presently, the Colonos cultivate a variety of agricultural goods, specializing in peach and tobacco production and transforming the Rio Grande do Sul into the largest purveyor of those products in Brazil (Secretaria de Planejamento and Governanc ¸a e Gest ~ ao 2021). Also, with rural tourism, those farmers have played a leading role in revealing that rural spaces can transcend their agricultural function, demonstrating a potential for sustainability and conserving rural communities ' social networks (Salamoni et al. 2021).

In the case of rural Black communities, many of them are composed of farming families. They struggle, however, with historical difficulties in accessing land. Furthermore, they navigate different experiences of political articulation and negotiations with the Brazilian state. As a result of Black political mobilizations in Brazil, recent public policies for quilombos aim to promote racial equality. To execute these policies in the local context, the federal government compartmentalized them into programs related to issues such as housing, social development, and productive inclusion. In the case of Serra dos Tapes, those social policies have been disconnected from territorial claims, practices, and social experiences of Black people in the region.

Regarding initiatives to encourage agricultural production, families of Quilombo Alto do Caix ~ ao -the community where this research took place -reported that technical and rural extension services are designed from the reality of the colonial farming production system. Seu Ademir, one of my interlocutors, said that the technical recommendations often do not consider his knowledge and practices, his artisanal tools for agricultural work, or even the fact that he does not have enough space or the proper type of soil for some procedures.

Personal and familial narratives also indicate that Black communities in Serra dos Tapes have experienced a silent territorial tension since nonIberian European colonization projects. The historical processes briefly described in this section reveal that Serra dos Tapes does not present the typical scenario in Brazil of social contrast between peasant communities and large agricultural companies, landowners, or extractive industries, where territorial conflicts are visible. The coexistence of Indigenous, Afro-descendants, and Colonos communities is a particularity that partially defines Serra dos Tapes ' s social and territorial relations. This social aspect of the region is one reason a narrative of an ' ethnic mosaic ' (Cerqueira 2010) in a certain sociospatial harmony predominates in the literature. This point of view prevails as a background in geographical studies about this region. Similarly, local authorities and policymakers ' discourses do not critique Serra dos Tapes ' s deeprooted social and racial hierarchies that affect everyday life in the quilombos.

Reading anthropological studies about the region (Rubert 2009, 2011; Pinheiro 2014, 2016) and listening to personal narratives, my analysis shows that the territorial tension is silent and connects to the ethnic-racial relations between Quilombolas and Colonos. After Black communities started to organize themselves politically, demanding their social rights and official recognition as quilombos, they faced persistent questions from the White settlers about whether they would initiate territorial claims. Charles, son of Seu Ademir, remembered being questioned by a neighbor:

There was a rumor running that the government would demarcate the territory. That wasn ' t even true, and they bothered me a lot: ' Oh, because you ' ll have to reimburse me … . ' I had gone out to buy a snack and, at the end of the day, I had to explain something that wasn ' t even going to happen.

Seu Ademir reported that the expansion of the colonial agricultural frontier displaced Quilombolas from cultivable lands: ' Where are the Quilombolas today?

They are on the top of the hill, where planting machines do not enter, where we wouldn ' t be able to plant. But we plant anyway. '

The Quilombo Alto do Caix ~ ao is surrounded and crossed by Colonos ' properties. This Black community avoids discussing the territorial claim issue due to the neighborship and work relations with the Colonos. Many Quilombolas have limited market access to sell their agricultural goods, or they do not have space to plant in an amount that is sufficient to sell, thus prioritizing domestic consumption (Gois and Miguel 2019). Therefore, they work for the Colonos in tobacco and peach plantations to increase their family income. Because of the worry of losing work opportunities offered by those settlers or creating a conflicting relationship with them, some people from the quilombo prefer not to pursue the territorial official recognition and demarcation, even though it is a right guaranteed by the Brazilian constitution.

In her studies about historical quilombos, B. Nascimento considered the connection between territory, nature, and broader socioeconomic dynamics with the Quilombola ubiquity in Brazil and the multiplicity of strategies they employed to confront slavery and build other forms of living (B. Nascimento 1985). Nascimento acknowledged the significance of Quilombolas ' narratives. According to her, oral histories encourage researchers not to essentialize those Black communities and to realize that ' the complexity of their institutions and the evolution of global society must be comprehended as interactional processes ' (B. Nascimento 2021, 114).

Thinking with Nascimento about the simultaneousness of changes and continuities of quilombos ' sociospatial practices over time, I understand that, in Serra dos Tapes, the Quilombolas scrutinize the region ' s social and economic circumstances, reflect on their situations, and organize their plans for social, economic, and territorial reproduction. Despite the adverse conditions -like insufficient space for planting and unequal access to the market -those Black families have sought to affirm themselves as food producers in the region to ensure their economic survival. At the same time, they preserve inherited cultural and territorial practices to confront everyday discrimination and sociospatial inequalities.

Navigating historical dispossessions, the Quilombolas in Alto do Caix ~ ao are, through inventiveness, building their conceptions of territory. The idea of territory that they carry forward in their sociospatial relations is that of a lived space. In this way, the territory is not just an analytical spatial category valuable for reflecting on Latin American geographies, nor is it reduced to the idea of the nation-state and political-administrative powers. The Quilombola territory in Serra dos Tapes has a physical and an existential quality (B. Nascimento 2018), and Black families mobilize it in their social, political, and daily lives.

## Quilombola Geographies and Agricultural Knowledge in Serra dos Tapes

In Brazil, anti-Black discourses and practices inaugurated during slavery (Bledsoe 2015) persisted in the postabolition era under new forms (Oliveira et al. 2017; Fischer, Grinberg, and Mattos 2018), such as residential segregation in cities (Campos 2012), religious intolerance (Teixeira and Ratts 2012), and police violence and criminalization of Black spaces (Campos 2010). Nonetheless, if the sociospatial dynamics of postabolition in Brazil determined the increased marginalization of Black population (A. Nascimento 2019), they were also marked by a significant strengthening of material and symbolic networks (Escobar 2008) that Black people created.

In Serra dos Tapes, the precariousness of freedom (Chalhoub 2011) of the Black population was characterized by precarious work, subordinate relationships with White settlers (Pinheiro 2016), and frequent land expropriations. According to Seu Pedro, a Quilombola elder in the Alto do Caix ~ ao community, in the first half of the twentieth century, his grandfather had settled in the vicinity of Alto do Caix ~ ao before being expelled by Colonos. Later, he managed to buy new land in a place called Tr ^ es Cerros. Seu Pedro ' s grandfather left these lands to his brother as he needed to spend some time in the city for medical care. Seu Pedro reported that his great-uncle, months later, was also expelled from the Tr ^ es Cerros. ' They evicted him and kept his papers. Then they lost their land. '

Seu Pedro also reported that his father was born, grew up, and worked on a farm in the region, where, along with his mother, he raised Seu Pedro and his siblings for thirteen years. After that, to build a new life, the whole family left the farm and moved to Alto do Caix ~ ao. Seu Pedro recounted a lifetime of

an intimate relationship with nature and commitment to agriculture, which was fundamental to maintaining his family in this new land. Agriculture is carried out through knowledge and techniques developed by his parents, from whom Seu Pedro and his siblings learned a significant part of what they know today about cultivating the land and everything it entails.

We were eight among all. It was me, there was my other brother, Santo, Jo ~ ao who had died and who was also raised here, and there ' s the other one who lives in the city, Ad ~ ao. And there were also three girls, two in town and one here. At the age of five or six, we were already working in the garden. My mother used to break or bend the corn stalks so that we could reach out and remove the corncobs. We were all raised in the crops since we were little.

The memory of Seu Pedro also goes back to the period when he, as a child, worked for the settlers:

We were eight children, and each one worked for a Colono. My father worked on the farm, and my mother worked as a maid in German and Italian homes. It was rough at that time, and there was a lot of poverty.

In addition to material issues, such as work relations and territorial expropriation, the Black population in Serra dos Tapes also had to face racial stigmatization due to the representation of Blackness as something negative (Santos 2002). This image was built and animated by the theory of scientific racism in the early twentieth century (Oliveira et al. 2017). In Brazil, scientific racism was one of the racial theories that helped continue the social hierarchies transformed with the end of slavery (Sodr  e 2002; Oliveira et al. 2017). The representation of Blackness as something negative, in addition to being predominant in the political, juridical, and institutional sphere, was reproduced and adapted to everyday relations in every corner of this country.

Hence, in Serra dos Tapes, social and labor relations were and still are crossed by the understanding that being Black means being inferior. Black people ' s agriculture is incorrect; the land they occupy is not suitable for cultivation; Black people ' s houses are uninhabitable. As McKittrick (2013) argued, ' the interlocking workings of human worth, race, and space demonstrate the ways the uninhabitable still holds currency in the present and continues to organize contemporary geographic arrangements ' (6). Ethnic-racial relations between Quilombolas and

Colonos are ambiguous, complex, and express a contradictory interaction between boundaries and belongings (Pinheiro 2016). In Alto do Caix ~ ao, it is usual that Quilombolas and Colonos with similar socioeconomic conditions build relations of reciprocity and friendship. The reality in Serra dos Tapes, however, is meticulous in submitting Black people to sociospatial hierarchies (Campos 2010).

Edegar, Seu Pedro ' s nephew, said that in his family, there was a shame in talking about slavery or about being Black in the region due to personal trajectories often marked by racial stigmatization and the consequences arising from it. Today, according to him, his family and other individuals in the community recognize themselves as political actors and as people with stories that must be told and, above all, heard. For Edegar, these stories of resistance can teach future generations how to plant and create possibilities even under challenging conditions. According to him, despite his mother sometimes showing unwillingness to narrate her trajectory, she never refused to tell how her family thrived in Alto do Caix ~ ao:

There are some things that my mother always said, that her father always said. When he arrived, this was all bush; at the time, there was nothing, but they could cut down the trees. So they did crops and survived here. And they stayed.

Confronting new forms of social hierarchy that emerged after abolition (Fischer, Grinberg, and Mattos 2018), the spaces of resistance and creation of the Black people in Serra dos Tapes also took on new traits. Cultural, territorial, and socioeconomic practices have diversified, not being simple responses to the harsh conditions and everyday racism they experience but exercises of creativity and production of knowledge. The fact that the lands of the Quilombolas in the Serra are not considered suitable for agriculture is the result of a systematic process of dispossession that they went through. Still, they created techniques and technologies to cultivate in small spaces among the rocks, developing pedological and agronomic knowledge.

According to Seu Santo, Seu Pedro ' s brother, rocky terrains preserve soil nutrients for plants ' development. Among the rocks, Seu Santo cultivates figs, peaches, sugar cane, and greens such as lettuce and cabbage. It is a small-scale production that he considers enough for his daily meals, for giving to their sons when they visit, and to share and

exchange with neighbors. He says that despite the land considered better for planting being taken from their grandparents, they made agriculture possible, putting it into practice without mechanization and chemical inputs. Seu Santo explains that those ecological practices provide ' healthier and tastier food ' and greater care for the cultivated land.

In Serra dos Tapes, the constitution and transformation of Black and Quilombola geographies entail an intergenerational sharing of knowledge and narratives (Scott 2020). Nevertheless, it also involves the ambivalent relationship with the Colonos, the displacements and different inhabited places, the connection with nature through agriculture, and the construction of other forms of life (B. Nascimento 1985, 2021). According to Seu Pedro and Seu Santo, it is through agriculture that they conserve traditional practices, such as the handling and use of medicinal herbs in the care of people and in the care of the cultivation itself, because, according to them, ' strong herbs ' such as rue, basil, and rosemary are protective. Dona Maria, the cousin of Seu Pedro and Seu Santo, says that when she was still a child, she learned from her mother and father how to manipulate roots and tree bark to elaborate solutions for treating diseases that could affect plants. While talking about her learnings, Dona Maria ' s eldest son interrupted the conversation, saying, ' And I learned all this from my mother. How can I say, it ' s something that passes from generation to generation. '

In addition to being a form of self-celebration, preserving traditional knowledge, and guaranteeing food autonomy, agriculture also involves the necessity to provide economic survival. Seu Pedro described how his family tried to cultivate the region ' s most traditional production, the peach:

Everything here was bush, but we felled a part of the forest and burned it. And then we started planting. We made orchards. In the first year, we planted a thousand peach trees, and then we increased and already had two thousand peach trees.

Seu Pedro said they tried to cultivate a large amount of peaches to supply the regional agroindustry that produces jams and compotes. He explained that this initiative was successful for not longer than six years because peach farming demands intensive work. Also, Colonos started to occupy the land and advanced a production system that merged family labor and external workers, of which Seu Pedro and his siblings became part.

Currently, a considerable part of the Quilombola family production is destined for domestic consumption, and the occasional surplus is sold in local markets, exchanged, or shared with other people in the community (Gois and Miguel 2019). Although the political economy of regional agriculture neglects it, production for domestic consumption is significant in the household economy because what is produced at home does not need to be purchased in the market (Grisa, Gazolla, and Schneider 2010). Besides, the exchanges and sharing with neighbors are fundamental in strengthening community ties and sustaining friendships.

## Black Creativity and Territory-Making

In this work, I understand Black spatialities as relational (Sodr  e 2002; Escobar 2015), in which being with constitutes the principle of strength, the power of realization, essential in the creation of places (Sodr  e 2002). For Sodr  e (2002), plurality, community, and contact are inherent in the relationships between Afro-descendant traditional communities and space. From this pluralistic conception of space, strength is not just physical or mechanical but corresponds to the power to act, transform, and perform. In this sense, strength, differentiated according to the particularities of beings, does not constitute an attribute of being but is being itself (Sodr  e 2002). In Black Brazilian communities ' experiences, strength flows from a principle of relation, which allows the construction of lived and shared territory.

Seu Santo said that before his family arrived in Alto do Caix ~ ao, the place had no other residents. ' This area here was all bush. At first, it was just me, my father, mother, and my siblings. And we were arriving. First, we planted, built a house, and things just continued to happen. ' Seu Santo also remarked that his father shared the land with people who arrived in the area and helped build their houses. With this, Seu Santo revealed the maintenance of a striking feature of the historical quilombos and Black spatialities: The ability to embrace the other (Sodr  e 2002).

From here, we started dividing, giving land to others. There was a lot of land, and we started to give it to others. People came in, asked us, and we gave them. My father also gave. The person had nowhere to live, and he gave a piece of land, helped with boards to build the houses.

' This was all bush. ' This remark was recurrent in my dialogues with the elders in Alto do Caix ~ ao. They used the term bush ( mato ) to refer to the original vegetation in Serra dos Tapes, formed by herbaceous plants, grasses, sedges, and subtropical forest with a predominance of native species such as arac ¸  a , pitanga , guajuvira , and tarum ~ a (Salamoni et al. 2021). Analyzing this statement, we can understand the bush as the field for creating something new: planting 2,000 peach trees and building houses with planks, clay, and handmade bricks. It is essential to say that when I speak of possibility, I am not referring to the forest and the transformation of nature in a linear and possibilist sense. The bush is where Black and Quilombola geographies in Serra dos Tapes take place.

It is a geography created from a direct, pragmatic, and at the same time sensitive relationship with the territory, and agriculture plays a fundamental role in this. When Seu Pedro spoke of the 2,000 peach trees planted by his family, he described the practice of slash-and-burn or coivara. Coivara is an agricultural technique created by the Indigenous peoples and used for a long time by the Quilombolas (PedrosoJunior et al. 2008). The coivara entails the temporary occupation of a particular piece of land, where inhabitants cut down part of the forest and give rise to subsistence crops. Afterward, this portion of land is no longer used and gives place to the regeneration of native vegetation (Pedroso-Junior et al. 2008). In the case of Seu Pedro ' s family and many Black people who undertook various emplacement (Scott 2019) strategies in Serra dos Tapes, however, part of the bush gave way to the cultivation of fruit, vegetables, tubers, and cucurbits, aiming at the people ' s permanence.

Even with the continuity of people in the cultivated place, the bush reveals itself as transversal and relational to the place and the construction of Black territory in Serra dos Tapes. White settlers consider the sedges and grasses in Quilombolas ' backyards synonymous with unsophisticated agriculture or even the absence of one. Nonetheless, according to Dona Maria and Seu Santo, the bush contributes to the protection and conservation of the soil and enables the practice of ecological agriculture that respects nature: ' Now you don ' t need to cut down the tree, poor thing; we just plant like this, ' said Dona Maria. Among the trees, sedges, and grasses, Dona Maria cultivates manioc, pumpkin, sweet potatoes, and various seasonings such as parsley, marjoram, and thyme. Dona Maria ' s knowledge challenges the conception of a linear transformation of nature, in which everything was forest before, and then agriculture came, with housing spaces, and the forest ceased to exist. The forest is part of the Quilombola landscapes in Serra dos Tapes, and the interaction with it is part of the construction of these Black territories.

With Dona Maria and Seu Santo, I have learned how the relation between subjects, objects, and nature constitutes this inventive vitality that enables the creation of inhabitable places. ' Therefore, strength depends on a space-place experienced as a totality, ' recalled Sodr  e (2002, 99). This totality is formed by trees, herbs, rocks, soil, houses, spirituality, and social relations. Whereas Sodr  e (2002), in his analysis, took the Candombl  e terreiros as territorial support for the continuity of African and Afrodescendant cultures in Brazil, I consider, in this work, the Quilombola territories as a result and at the same time as a possibility of creation and transformation of practices and spatial knowledge of rural Black populations.

The narratives I presented in this text and the reflection that I elaborate on them neither intend to nor can exhaust a discussion on the construction of Quilombola territories in Serra dos Tapes. They invite us to reflect on how personal and collective events on an almost granular scale and sometimes fragmented in memories communicate a wider region ' s social, political, and, consequently, spatial processes (B. Nascimento 2018, 2021; Scott 2019, 2020). B. Nascimento insisted on the pertinence of taking seriously personal and collective trajectories to understand how the Quilombolas construct, in everyday life, ideas of territory, nature, and agriculture that make possible the existence of the quilombos themselves (Scott 2020; B. Nascimento 2021).

## Conclusion

This article analyzes the ways in which Quilombolas in Serra dos Tapes create territorial conceptions and practices through agriculture. Taking into account the narratives of the people in Quilombo Alto do Caix ~ ao, we see that agriculture entails celebrating their knowledge and inventiveness, and it is re-created in a material and symbolic network woven through intergenerational relationships (Scott 2020).

Furthermore, Quilombolas ' narratives, practices, and knowledge expressed through their life histories offer some insights to advance discussions concerning the entanglement of race, nature, and environment within geographical studies.

Narrating personal stories, Seu Pedro, Seu Santo, Dona Maria, and Edegar demonstrated how the knowledge they create, reproduce, and transmit to new generations enables the production and conservation of agroecosystems without external inputs. Developing techniques, such as planting herbs and small trees among the rocks, this Black community transformed areas where agriculture is inconceivable for conventional production systems. These practices and narratives reveal the importance of knowledge created by rural communities that promote actions and debates concerning nature conservation (Riley and Harvey 2007).

Quilombolas recount social, territorial, and historical tensions in daily relationships with the Colonos. Accounts of land eviction and situations of everyday racism challenge the national ideology of racial democracy (Fischer, Grinberg, and Mattos 2018) translated, in Serra dos Tapes, into the narrative of the ethnic mosaic. This narrative informs sociological, anthropological, and geographical inquiries regarding this region (Grando 1989; Cerqueira 2010, Salamoni and Waskievicz 2013; Salamoni et al. 2021). Despite celebrating ethnic diversity, these studies analyze Serra dos Tapes ' s social and spatial processes primarily from White settlers ' social, economic, cultural, and territorial experiences. The Quilombolas recount their experiences showing that Serra dos Tapes is also inhabited and built by Black people. In doing so, they encourage meditations on how personal and collective narratives of socially and spatially marginalized populations can disrupt hegemonic and uncritical accounts of specific landscapes (Riley and Harvey 2007; Scott 2019, 2020).

Quilombolas ' lived experiences and narratives invite geographers to reflect on the specificities of symbiotic relations between rural space production and anti-Black racism. Latin American literature offers insightful analysis regarding the environmental consequences of those mutual connections (Escobar 2008, 2015; Mosquera-Vallejo 2020; Pinheiro and Paix ~ ao 2020). Nevertheless, thinking of rural Black communities within the framework of Black geographies requires not solely a recognition of their shared experiences in struggling with the legacies of colonialism. This interdisciplinary project recognizes the particularities and complexities of Black communities, challenging imaginaries and essentialized conceptions about them (Sodr  e 2002; Nascimento 2021). In addition, analytical connections between life history and geography can provide unique and situated elements to problematize foundational geographical categories. Articulating narratives and practices, Black families of Alto do Caix ~ ao Community complicate the traditional understanding that territorial construction resides exclusively in institutionalized power. Creating a unique relationship with nature through agriculture, developing spatial knowledge, and building material and symbolic networks (Escobar 2015), the Quilombolas demonstrate that territory can be founded in everyday life. These lived experiences are not mere traits of the territory but comprise its existential significance.

## Acknowledgments

The author thanks the people from Quilombo Alto do Caix ~ ao for sharing their life histories, Rafael Padilha for his support and feedback, the anonymous reviewers for the constructive comments on the article, and the editors for their support during the publication process.

## ORCID

Gabriela Rodrigues Gois http://orcid.org/00000003-1097-5250

## Note

1. In this article, I use the term quilombo to refer to the community and Quilombola to talk about the person who is part of the community.

## References

Aquino, J., and S. Schneider. 2015. O Pronaf e o desenvolvimento rural brasileiro: Avanc ¸os, contradic ¸ ~ oes e desafios para o futuro [Pronaf and Brazilian rural development: Advancements, contradictions, and challenges for the future]. In Pol  ı ticas de desenvolvimento rural no Brasil , ed. C. Grisa and S. Schneider, 53 -81. Porto Alegre, Brazil: Editora da UFRGS.

Bledsoe, A. 2015. The negation and reassertion of Black geographies in Brazil. ACME: An International EJournal for Critical Geographies 14 (1):324 -43.

- Bledsoe, A. 2017. Marronage as a past and present geography in the Americas. Southeastern Geographer 57 (1):30 -50. doi: 10.1353/sgo.2017.0004.

Campos, A. 2010. Do quilombo  a favela: A produc ¸ ~ ao do ' espac ¸o criminalizado ' no Rio de Janeiro [From quilombo to the favela: The production of the ' criminalized space ' in Rio de Janeiro]. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Editora Bertrand.

Campos, A. 2012. Quest ~ oes  etnico-raciais no contexto da segregac ¸ ~ ao socioespacial na produc ¸ ~ ao do espac ¸o urbano brasileiro: Algumas quest ~ oes te  orico-metodol  ogicas [Ethnic-racial issues in the context of sociospatial segregation in the production of Brazilian urban space: Some theoretical-methodological issues]. In Quest ~ oes urbanas e racismo , ed. R. dos Santos, 66 -102. Petr  opolis, Brazil: DP et Alii.

- Cerqueira, F. 2010. Serra dos tapes: Mosaico de tradic ¸ ~ oes  etnicas e paisagens culturais [Serra dos Tapes: Mosaic of ethnic traditions and cultural landscapes]. In Anais do IV Semin  ario Internacional em Mem  oria e Patrim ^ onio: Mem  oria, patrim ^ onio e tradic ¸ ~ ao , ed. F. Michelon and M. Ferreira, 872 -74. Pelotas, Brazil: Editora da UFPel.
- Chalhoub, S. 2011. The precariousness of freedom in a slave society Brazil in the nineteenth century. International Review of Social History 56 (3):405 -39. doi: 10.1017/S002085901100040X.
- Costa, R. C. R. 2011. O pensamento social brasileiro e a quest ~ ao racial: Da ideologia do ' branqueamento '  as ' divis ~ oes perigosas ' [Brazilian social thought and the racial issue: From ' whitening ' ideology to ' dangerous divisions ' ]. In Relac ¸ ~ oes  etnico-raciais na escola: Desafios te  oricos e pr  aticas pedag  ogicas ap  os a Lei, (10.639) , ed. C. Miranda, M. Lins, and R. Costa, 28 -39. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Quartet/FAPERJ.
- Escobar, A. 2008. Territories of difference: Place, movements, life, redes . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Escobar, A. 2015. Territorios de diferencia: La ontolog  ı a pol  ı tica de los ' derechos al territorio ' [Territories of difference: The political ontology of ' rights to territory ' ]. Revista Desenvolvimento e Meio Ambiente 35 (1):89 -100. doi: 10.34096/cas.i41.1594.
- Fischer, B., K. Grinberg, and H. Mattos. 2018. Las leyes, el silencio y las desigualdades racializadas en la historia afrobrasile ~ na [Laws, silence, and racialized inequalities in Afro-Brazilian history]. In Estudios afrolatinoamericanos: Una introducci  on , ed. A. de la Fuente and G. Andrews, 161 -216. Buenos Aires, Argentina: CLACSO.
- Fundac ¸ ~ ao Cultural Palmares. 2021. Certificac ¸ ~ ao Quilombola [Quilombola certification]. Accessed November 15, 2021. https://www.palmares.gov.br/ ?page\_id=37551.
- Gois, G., and L. Miguel. 2019. O papel da agricultura e do trabalho n ~ ao agr  ı cola na reproduc ¸ ~ ao socioecon ^ omica de fam  ı lias quilombolas na regi ~ ao da Serra dos Tapes, Rio Grande do Sul, Brasil [The role of agriculture and non-agricultural labor in the socioeconomic reproduction of quilombola families in the Serra dos
- Tapes region, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil]. Eutop  ı a, Revista de Desarrollo Econ  omico Territorial 15 (15):169 -91. doi: 10.17141/eutopia.15.2019.3871.
- Grando, M. Z. 1989. Pequena agricultura em crise: O caso da col ^ onia francesa no Rio Grande do Sul [Small agriculture in crisis: The case of the French colony in Rio Grande do Sul]. Porto Alegre, Brazil: Fundac ¸ ~ ao de Economia e Estat  ı stica.
- Grisa, C., M. Gazolla, and S. Schneider. 2010. A ' produc ¸ ~ ao invis  ı vel ' na agricultura familiar: Autoconsumo, seguranc ¸a alimentar e pol  ı ticas p  ublicas de desenvolvimento rural [ ' Invisible production ' in family farming: Self-consumption, food security, and public policies for rural development]. Agroalimentaria 16 (31):65 -79.
- Grisa, C., and S. Schneider. 2014. Tr ^ es gerac ¸ ~ oes de pol  ı ticas p  ublicas para a agricultura familiar e formas de interac ¸ ~ ao entre sociedade e estado no Brasil [Three generations of public policies for family farming and forms of interaction between society and the state in Brazil]. Revista de Economia e Sociologia Rural 52 (Suppl. 1):125 -46. doi: 10.1590/S0103-2003201 4000600007.
- Gutierrez, E. 2001. Negros, charqueadas e olarias: Um estudo sobre o espac ¸o pelotense [Blacks, jerky farms, and potteries: A study on the pelotense space]. Pelotas, Brazil: Editora da UFPel.
- McKittrick, K. 2006. Demonic grounds: Black women and the cartographies of struggle . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- McKittrick, K. 2013. Plantation futures. Small Axe: A Caribbean Journal of Criticism 17 (3):1 -15. doi: 10. 1215/07990537-2378892.
- Mosquera-Vallejo, Y. 2020. Territorios de la negridad en Colombia: De las expoliaciones, extrahecciones a las re-existencias en el valle del Pat  ı a [Territories of Blackness in Colombia: Spoliation, extraheccion, and re-existences in the Pat  ı a Valley]. Revista de Geograf  ı a Norte Grande 76:9 -29. doi: 10.4067/S071834022020000200009.
- Nascimento, A. 2019. O quilombismo [The quilombismo]. S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil: Editora Perspectiva SA.
- Nascimento, B. 1985. O conceito de quilombo e a resist ^ encia cultural negra [The concept of quilombo and the Black cultural resistance]. Afrodi  aspora 3 (6):41 -49.
- Nascimento, B. 2018. Quilombola e intelectual: Possibilidade nos dias da destruic ¸ ~ ao [Quilombola and intellectual: Possibility in days of destruction]. S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil: Filhos da  Africa.
- Nascimento, B. 2021. Uma hist  oria feita por m ~ aos negras [A history made by Black hands], ed. A. Ratts. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Zahar.
- Oliveira, F., J. S  a, L. Gomes, M. Rosa, M. Perussato, S. Silva, and S. Santos. 2017. Pessoas comuns, hist  orias incr  ı veis: A construc ¸ ~ ao da liberdade na sociedade sul-riograndense [Ordinary people, incredible stories: The construction of freedom in the society of Rio Grande do Sul]. Porto Alegre, Brazil: EST Edic ¸ ~ oes.
- Pedroso-Junior, N., R. Murrieta, C. Taqueda, N. Navazinas, A. Ruivo, D. Bernardo, and W. Neves. 2008. A casa e a roc ¸a: Socioeconomia, demografia e

- agricultura em populac ¸ ~ oes quilombolas do Vale do Ribeira, S ~ ao Paulo, Brasil [The house and the garden: Socio-economy, demography, and agriculture in quilombola populations of the Ribeira Valley, S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil]. Boletim do Museu Paraense Em  ı lio Goeldi. Ci ^ encias Humanas 3 (2):227 -52. doi: 10.1590/S198181222008000200007.
- Pinheiro, P. 2014. Comunidades quilombolas na regi ~ ao das Antigas Charqueadas: Territ  orios negros e pol  ı ticas p  ublicas no munic  ı pio de S ~ ao Lourenc ¸o Do Sul, RS [Quilombola communities in the Old Charqueadas region: Black territories and public policies in the municipality of S ~ ao Lourenc ¸o do Sul, RS]. Cadernos do LEPAARQ: Textos de Antropologia, Arqueologia e Patrim ^ onio 11 (22):323 -41. doi: 10.15210/LEPAARQ.V11I22.3392.
- Pinheiro, P. 2016. Pertencimentos, fronteiras e intersecc ¸ ~ oes: Processos de identificac ¸ ~ ao em S ~ ao Lourenc ¸o do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul [Belongings, boundaries, and intersections: Identification processes in S ~ ao Lourenc ¸o do Sul, Rio Grande do Sul]. Novos Rumos Sociol  ogicos 4 (5):7 -35. doi: 10.15210/norus.v4i5.8427.
- Pinheiro, P., and A. Paix ~ ao. 2020. Quando a desterritorializac ¸ ~ ao vem do rio: A poluic ¸ ~ ao do Rio Gramame na comunidade quilombola de Mituac ¸u, PB [When deterritoralization comes from the river: The pollution of the Gramame River in the quilombola community of Mituac ¸u, PB]. Viv ^ encia: Revista de Antropologia 1 (53):15 -34. doi: 10.21680/2238-6009. 2019v1n53ID20599.
- Riley, M., and D. Harvey. 2007. Talking geography: On oral history and the practice of geography. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 8 (3):345 -51. doi: 10.1080/ 14649360701488765.
- Rubert, R. 2009. Comunidades negras no RS: O redesenho do mapa estadual [Black communities in RS: The redesign of the state map]. In RS negro: Cartografias sobre a produc ¸ ~ ao do conhecimento , ed. G. da Silva, J. dos Santos, and L. Carneiro, 165 -81. Porto Alegre, Brazil: Edipucrs.
- Rubert, R. 2011. Comunidades remanescentes de quilombos: Alguns desafios ao olhar antropol  ogico [Remnant communities of quilombos: Some challenges to the anthropological perspective]. Cadernos do LEPAARQ: Textos de Antropologia, Arqueologia e Patrim ^ onio 4 (7):37 -60. doi: 10.15210/LEPAARQ.V4I7/8.1189.
- Salamoni, G., A. Drehmer, L. Wassmansdorf, M. Sodr  e, M. Costa, M. Rosa, and T. Silva. 2021. A geografia da Serra dos Tapes: Natureza, sociedade e paisagem [The geography of Serra dos Tapes: Nature, society, and landscape]. Pelotas, Brazil: Editora da UFPEL.
- Salamoni, G., and C. Waskievicz. 2013. Serra dos Tapes: Espac ¸o, sociedade e natureza [Serra dos Tapes: Space, society, and nature]. Tessituras 1 (1):73 -100. doi: 10. 15210/TES.V1I1.2670.
- Santos, G. 2002. A invenc ¸ ~ ao do ' Ser Negro: ' Um percurso das ideias que naturalizaram a inferioridade dos Negros [The invention of ' being Black: ' A path of ideas that naturalized the inferiority of Black]. S ~ ao Paulo, Brazil: Pallas.
- Scott, D. 2019. Oral history and emplacement in ' nowhere at all: ' The role of personal and family narratives in rural Black community-building. Social &amp; Cultural Geography 20 (8):1094 -1113. doi: 10.1080/ 14649365.2017.1413205.
- Scott, D. 2020. Intergenerationality, family narratives, and Black geographic space in rural North Carolina. Gender, Place &amp; Culture 27 (7):984 -1006. doi: 10. 1080/0966369X.2019.1612854.
- Secretaria de Planejamento, Governanc ¸a e Gest ~ ao. 2021. Atlas socioecon ^ omico do Rio Grande do Sul [Socioeconomic atlas of Rio Grande do Sul]. Porto Alegre, Brazil: Departamento de Planejamento Governamental.
- Sodr  e, M. 2002. O terreiro e a cidade: A forma social Negro-brasileira [The terreiro and the city: The Black-Brazilian social form]. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil: Imago.
- Teixeira, J., and A. Ratts. 2012. A cidade e os terreiros: Religi ~ oes de matriz africana e os processos de (in)visibilidade e (in)toler ^ ancia no espac ¸o urbano [The city and the terreiros: African-based religions and the processes of (in)visibility and (in)tolerance in the urban space]. In Quest ~ oes urbanas e racismo , ed. R. dos Santos, 332 -61. Petr  opolis, Brazil: DP et Alii.
- Torres, L. 1994. A formac ¸ ~ ao hist  orica do Rio Grande do Sul: O ind  ı gena no discurso luso-brasileiro [The historical formation of Rio Grande do Sul: The Indigenous in the Luso-Brazilian discourse]. Estudos Ibero-Americanos 20 (1):173 -81. doi: 10.15448/1980864X.1994.1.29091.

GABRIELA RODRIGUES GOIS is a PhD Candidate in Geography, Pontificia Universidad Cat  olica de Chile, Vicu ~ na Mackenna, 4860, Santiago, Chile. E-mail: ggois@uc.cl. Her research interests include the connections between territorial issues, place-making practices, and housing policies in rural Black communities in Brazil.