- ---.1978. Urban Economics . Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press.
- Savoie, D. J. 1992. Regional Economic Development: Canada's Search for Solutions . T oronto: University of Toronto Press.
- Statistics Canada. 1992. Standard Industrial Classification  Manual, Revised 1970 . Ottawa: Information Canada.
- Thompson, W. R. 1965. A Preface to Urban Economics . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
- Tornqvist, G. 1970. Contact Systems and Regional Development . Lund Studies in Geography (B), No. 35. Lund: University of Lund.

WILLIAM J. COFFEY is Professor in the Département de géographie, Université de Montréal, C.P . 6128 Succ. CV, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7. His primary area of research is the role of service activities, and producer services in particular, in the development of national, regional, and metropolitan economies.

RICHARDG.SHEARMURisaPh.D.studentin the Département de géographie, Université de Montréal, C.P. 6128 Succ. CV, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3C 3J7. His doctoral research is on the spatial distribution and growth of employment in Canada.

## Migration, Sources of Income, and Community Change in the Nonmetropolitan Northwest*

## Peter B. Nelson

University of Washington

During the late 1980s and the first half of the 1990s, the nonmetropolitan Northwest grew quite rapidly, narrowing the gap between the growth rates of the metropolitan Northwest, and outpacing national rates. This growth was largely the result of in-migration from regional and national metropolitan areas. Traditional economic base theory does not explain the recent growth, as employment levels in the region's basic industries continue to stagnate and decline, and the sources of income for these in-migrants remain a mystery. This paper utilizes data from the 1990 Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS) to determine the extent to which metropolitan-origin migrants are measurably different from oldtime nonmetropolitan residents on certain socioeconomic variables, in an attempt to understand the ways in which the newcomers survive financially. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) shows that newcomers are younger, earn less in wages and salary, receive more nonearnings income, and reside in more valuable housing compared with the resident population. Discriminant analysis shows that differences in the earned income measures are largely explained by age differences, while the nonearnings income and value of residence remain significantly higher for the metropolitan origin migrants even when age and earned income are controlled. While the analysis indicates that measurable socioeconomic differences do exist between the two populations, it appears that the current wave of growth and change in the nonmetropolitan Northwest is much more complicated than a simple newcomer-oldtimer dichotomy. Key Words: nonmetropolitan population growth, 'New West,' nonearnings income, urban-rural migration.

## Introduction

O ver the last 25 years, rural areas throughout the United States have been undergoing demographic  and economic  changes broadly termed restructuring. Traditional rural economic activities such as farming, mining, and logging have suffered stagnation or absolute de- clines in employment levels (Rasker 1995), yet at the same time, many areas are experiencing rapid levels of population growth as footloose migrants consciously decide to move to lessdense settings with qualities they desire. T raditional macroeconomic explanations of migration have a difficult time explaining these recent population flows, as there appears to be

* This research is funded by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship.

no expansion in traditional basic economic activity in many of these rapidly growing places. This lack of expansion of the economic base suggests that migrant populations (newcomers) derive their income from different sources than the resident (oldtimer) population. Indeed, macro-level analysis indicates that nonearnings sources of income have become extremely important in many rapidly growing rural communities (Nelson 1997), yet no analysis exists to date examining the income structures of newcomers compared with oldtimers at the microlevel. Migration is obviously a selective process, and differences between movers and nonmovers on variables such as education, age, and occupation are widely accepted (Clark 1986). Within the context of this study, however, it seems that sources of income and other socioeconomic variables might play a critical role in distinguishing newcomers from oldtimers. This paper examines the socioeconomic differences between newcomers and oldtimers in the nonmetropolitan Northwest, an area experiencing growth rates similar to those of the entire West.

A somewhat ancillary objective of this paper derives from a recent wave of stories appearing in the popular news media. Change is inevitable in the wake of rapid in-migration, and not surprisingly, rural communities view migration-induced changes as contentious and fight against such growth and change (Egan 1993; Ferguson 1994; Elliott et al. 1995; Farley 1995; Clayton 1996). Stories appear almost weekly in the popular news media reporting on crisis, turmoil, and outright 'war' taking place in the contested terrain of this restructured 'new' West. The role that migration plays in this restructuring process is at least in part a function of how different the migrant population is from the resident population, yet once more, the degree of difference between newcomers and oldtimers has not been demonstrated empirically. Furthermore,thestoriesreportedinthenewsmediarely heavily on a simplistic newcomer-oldtimer classification without questioning the usefulness of such a dichotomous categorization. Several academics examining migration-induced community change rely on these categories as well (Brown et al. 1989; Johnson and Rasker 1995), yet it is highly unlikely that newcomers and oldtimers constitute two homogeneous groups. Thus, the analysis in this paper examines not only differences across groups, but also variation within these two populations. The documentation of variations within the populations is needed  to  question  these  popular categories often used in describing migration to rural areas and the ensuing social and economic change.

It is important to emphasize that the analysis contained in this paper focuses on quantifiable measures of economic and social differences between Western newcomers and oldtimer populations. While it is highly likely that cultural values and political ideology also contribute to restructuring  in the nonmetropolitan  West, suchqualitative differences are beyond the scope of this analysis and will be left to future research efforts. Furthermore, this analysis is confined to individuals living in nonmetropolitan parts of Washington, Oregon, Idaho, and Montana: the Northwest. While this region is relatively small in terms of both population and land area compared with the 11 states normally considered as the West, the trends in the Northwest are emblematic of processes taking place throughout the West.

The Northwest can be seen as a microcosm of the larger West. The growth trends in the Northwest are largely representative of those occurring throughout the 11-state region (Fig. 1). Between 1990 and 1995, approximately two-thirds of all nonmetropolitan counties in the West grew at or above the national average of approximately 1% per year. Likewise, two out of three nonmetropolitan counties in the Northwest also exceeded national growth rates. Also, the areas experiencing decline  in the Northwest are similar to those declining areas across the entire region: agricultural counties dependent upon dryland farming and grazing. Economically, both regions have experienced similar fates in recent years in their extractive sectors such as forestry, mining, and agriculture. Furthermore, there is tremendous geographical variety in the types of landscapes of the Northwest representative of the larger region. The Northwest contains mountain ranges, desert terrain, plains, coastal areas, and major metropolitan centers for adjacency. Finally, the processes contributing to the recent growth trends (technological innovation, desire for less-dense residential settings, urban congestion, quality of life factors, etc.) are not unique to the Northwest, nor to the West, but are found throughout the entire nation.

Figure 1: 1990-1995 population growth rates: Nonmetropolitan west.

<!-- image -->

This paper is organized into four additional sections. The next section presents a review of previous scholarly work relating to population movements, restructuring in nonmetropolitan settings, and possible implications of socioeconomic differences between newcomers and oldtimers. The following section describes the source and characteristics of the dataset used in the study, and the third section reports on the results of a two-phased statistical analysis comparing the socioeconomic characteristics of newcomers and oldtimers. The final section of the paper interprets these results and then frames the measured differences within the reviewed literature and the debates in the media.

## Migration, Community Change, and a Basis for Conflict

Economic restructuring, environmental amenities, quality of life issues, and technological advancements have all contributed to the recent population movements to the nonmetropolitan Northwest (Dillman et al. 1995; Rasker 1995; Beyers and Lindahl 1996; Power 1996; Salant et al. 1997). Regardless of the reason for movement, migration brings different groups of people into geographical proximity with one another. Socioeconomic differences between newcomers and oldtimers may explain the lack of an economic foundation for the observed population growth. It is possible that newcomers' income is derived from different sources

compared with oldtimers, allowing for migration without necessarily an increase of basic economic activity. Additionally, socioeconomic differences between the two populations may provide a basis for understanding the reported conflicts taking place in some of the rapidly growing rural communities.

Aggregate-level analysis indicates a shift in the importance of various components of personal income for rural  communities.  Rasker (1995) shows, for the ColumbiaRiver Basin, that traditional wage and salary income is becoming less important over  time, while nonearnings sources of income (transfer payments and dividends, interest, and rental income) are increasing. Data for the period 1970 to 1994 indicate that for nonmetropolitan counties in the entire West, farm income and earnings income from wages and salaries have dropped from roughly two-thirds of all personal income in 1970 to barely half of personal income in 1994 (Nelson 1997). The importance of these different sources of income for different segments of the population (newcomers or oldtimers), however, remains unstudied. Nonearnings income provides one means by which individuals can support themselves financially without evident employment opportunities. Likewise, small businesses, such as those generating nonfarm proprietor income, may also support the recent migration streams. An examination of the socioeconomic differences between newcomers and oldtimers with an emphasis on sources of income may provide an understanding of the economic support mechanisms enabling the recent migration trends.

A socioeconomic comparison may also provide  insights  into  the reported  conflict surrounding recent nonmetropolitan growth. Rural sociologists and geographers have examined population growth in an attempt to compare movers and nonmovers in growing rural communities and to examine the impacts in-migration has on receiving areas. Much of the work relating to internal migration, community change, and newcomer-oldtimer differences stems from the rural renaissance of the 1970s. As nonmetropolitan areas grew more rapidly compared with metropolitan parts of the United States during the 1970s, scholars became quite interested in the causes and consequences of rural population growth. Some researchers argued, in this context, that the new rural residents represent a challenge to the status quo. As newcomers with different  sets of politics,  different economic means, and different experiences moved to rural areas, the social diversity of these less-populated communities increased substantially, and traditional power structures changed (Freudenberg 1982).

Freudenberg (1982) discusses the fate of oldtimeranchersinarapidlygrowingruralcommunity to illustrate the challenges population growth can pose  to receiving  communities. Prior to rapid in-migration, ranchers typically held social and political positions with relatively high levels of power and respect. Their views were often heeded when decisions pertaining to the community were made. As newcomers enter communities in increasing numbers, however, the political position of the rancher is challenged. Newcomers may have visions of the future of the community that directly contradict those of the oldtime ranchers. Thus, the influx of newcomers represents a social disruption in the receiving community. Brown et al. (1989) echo Freudenberg's claims in reporting the results from a survey of community attitudes and changeinarapidly growingcommunityinUtah. The results of the survey indicate that population growth leads to social disruption and decreased  levels of community satisfaction  for oldtime residents in a particular destination. They further show that disruption and satisfaction are effected into the future even after the growth impulses have subsided.

Rank and Voss (1982) provide an interesting twist to this discussion by bringing socioeconomic status into the analysis of newcomer integration and involvement in rural communities. Their study shows a link between newcomers' socioeconomic status and involvement in community affairs. New migrants with higher levels of socioeconomic status (measured by income, education, occupation, etc.) were morelikely to vote, belong to organizations, and have friends in their new community. While the objective of this study was to explore integration into destination communities, the analysis simply looks at involvement. Indeed, as the analysis shows, involvement does increase with socioeconomic status, but if the ways in which newcomers are involved clash with those of oldtimers, involvement may actually lead to social disintegration rather than integration. As Freudenberg (1982) argues, newcomers often

represent a challenge to traditional political and social fabrics in rural communities. Thus, if the current newcomers are of higher socioeconomic status, they may be more likely to be involved, but not integrated, in their new communities, and the involvement may actually be in some ways posing newcomers against oldtimers.

More recent work provides additional bases for a socioeconomic comparative analysis of migration to the nonmetropolitan Northwest. Brown (1993) examines rural community change and concludes that contemporary rural communities are no longer production-oriented spatial communities, but rather are increasingly organized around consumptive behavior. Obviously, socioeconomics contribute to consumption, and it is possible that, if the newcomers are differentiated from oldtimers socioeconomically, they are key players in this shift from production  to  consumption.  Furthermore, if status  and  political clout are now related to position  within  a new consumption-oriented system, oldtimers tied to the traditional production-dominated system may be resentful of this shift from production to consumption  that Brown (1993) asserts characterizes rural communities today. T o the extent that this shift is contentious, then, it may result in a conflict between newcomers and oldtimers.

Naples (1994) takes a slightly different epistemological  perspective  on  rural  community change, but her insights are quite revealing. Her work empirically examines the challenges to and changes in rural ideology. Several components of rural ideology have been challenged in recent times by rural restructuring, and migration is a key component of the restructuring process. Feelings of gemeinschaft (local community as source of support and locus of socialization), rugged individualism, male-dominated households, and  racial/ethnic  homogeneity  are all changing as diverse streams of migrants enter rural communities, government subsidies are utilized to  support  the  stagnating economic bases of these places, and females enter the work force in large numbers to supplement household incomes. An additional challenge to rural ideology suggested by Naples (1994) is the growing schism in rural areas between the well-to-do and the disadvantaged. Naples argues that rural restructuring is resulting in a deepening gap between  the  haves and the have-nots.  As this schism grows, the  potential for  conflict  in- creases. It is possible that well-to-do newcomers are exacerbating this schism and contributing to a contentious shift in rural ideology.

Each of the works discussed above suggests that insights may be added to our understanding of rural restructuring by examining the socioeconomic characteristics of newcomers and oldtimers. Do newcomers rely more heavily on nonearnings income sources? If so, such a difference may provide an explanation for the economicbasesupportingthe current growth wave. Do newcomers occupy higher socioeconomic positions than oldtimers, as this may result in their increased involvement in community affairs and a challenge to the traditional rural political structures (Freudenberg 1982; Rank andVoss1982)?Socioeconomicdifferencesmay also result in different attitudes toward the shift fromproductiontoconsumptionasdescribedby Brown (1993). Is the growing gap between the haves and have-nots described by Naples (1994) and the challenges such a gap poses to rural ideology related to in-migration? Each of these questions speculate that newcomers to rural areas are socioeconomically differentiated from oldtimers, and a better understanding of the rural restructuring process will be gained by a more detailed analysis of the characteristics of newcomers and oldtimers.

Several of the works cited above (Rank and Voss 1982; Brown et al. 1989; Johnson and Rasker 1995) and many others related to this topic, however, suffer from a monolithic conception of the newcomer population. These scholars have fallen into the newcomer-oldtimer dichotomous trap used by the popular media in describing changes in rural communities. While dichotomies provide quick and easy categories in which to place people, Cloke and Thrift (1990) argue that any analysis of rural restructuring must go beyond such simple dichotomies. They are highly critical of the 'over-standardization in previous studies of 'newcomers' and locals' (p. 165). Our understanding of migration and rural restructuring will not be  enhanced if future analysis simply defaults to such broad categories. Whilethemethodsusedinthisstudyborrowthe newcomer and oldtimer categories, segments of the analysis examine variation both between and within these populations, adding to our understanding of the complexity of this rural restructuring process.

The dataset utilized in the following analysis is a subsample taken from the 1990 Public Use Microdata Sample (PUMS). The PUMS contains social and economic information at the level of the individual as well as PUMA information for both 1985 and 1990. PUMAs are the geographic units for which the PUMS data are collected; PUMAs vary in size from parts of highly populated counties to aggregations of counties in more sparsely populated areas. In the nonmetropolitan Northwest, all of the PUMAs are aggregations of counties.

BycomparingthePUMAofresidencein1985 with the PUMA of residence in 1990, it is possible to determine those individuals who moved during the five-year period. Further, by crossreferencing a list of PUMAs that are part or all metropolitan, it is possible to determine if an individual moved from a metropolitan residence in 1985 to a nonmetropolitan residence in 1990. Any individual who made such a move over the five-year period was classified as a newcomer, and the balance of the sample were coded as oldtimers. This technique categorizes both inter- and intra-regional migrants as newcomers, but individuals who moved from a nonmetropolitan area to another nonmetropolitan area are classified as oldtimers. Therefore, it is possible that an 'oldtimer' may in fact be a recent in-migrant, but from a nonmetropolitan place of origin. Roughly 10% of all oldtimers (1,037 individuals) fall into this category. This definition of newcomers ensures that they are not distinguished by migrant status alone, but also share a recent metropolitan residential experience. There are two reasons for choosing this type of definition rather than simply selecting all recent migrants regardless of origin. First, the degree to which migration contributes to restructuring and community change, at least in part, is a function of individuals with different backgrounds and prior experiences coming into contact with one another. Prior metropolitan residence ensures some certainty of different prior experiences. The second reason has to do with the reported conflict in the news media. The recent stories rely heavily on images of wealthy 'city-folk' disrupting their new 'peaceful' nonmetropolitan communities. In order to critically examine the news media's claims, this type of definition is necessary. The analysis reported below focuses on differences between newcomers from metropolitan areas and oldtimers regardless of migrant status. While this definition may cloud differences that exist between  migrants  and nonmigrants (because there are migrants within the oldtimer population), it will highlight differences between persons with recent metropolitan residential experience and those with no recent residence in a metropolitan area.

Selected variables from the records for all nonmetropolitan residents ages 16 to 64 living in the states of Idaho, Montana, Washington, and Oregon were extracted from the PUMS files. The sample was limited to those of working years to eliminate the effects of retired migrants on the analysis. One of the key components of the analysis is reliance on earnings versus nonearnings income, and it was thought that the inclusion of retired individuals in the sample would artificially skew the analysis pertaining to sources of income. An additional dummy variable  was created  signifying newcomer status based on the above definition.

After first profiling the general characteristics of the sample, comparative statistics are used to explore simple univariate differences between the newcomers and oldtimers on several socioeconomic measures related to sources of income. Then, based on the results of the simple comparison, a set of more powerful multivariate discriminant models are created to determine the combined effects of the distinguishing variables.

## Results

General Sample Characteristics

Demographically, newcomers and oldtimers are quite similar. While there are slightly more male newcomers than  oldtimers, the  difference is minimal. Both newcomers and oldtimers are overwhelmingly white  and  native-born individuals. The largest share of foreign-born newcomers  are  of Mexican  origin, which is not surprising given  the  prevalence of Mexican workers in the agricultural sectors of the region. Subtle differences are found in an examination of employment profiles for the two populations. Oldtimers are overrepresented in agriculture and manufacturing jobs, while newcomers show relative concentrations in professional services, the military, and retail trade. Again, however, the

two populations' employment profiles are for the most part quite similar.

The migration behavior of the sample population is more interesting. More than half of the population (53%) moved during the five-year period, and almost half of these movers crossed a  PUMA boundary (46.7%). Approximately 25% (2,755 individuals) of the sample population lived in a different PUMA in 1985, and nearly two-thirds of these individuals were living in a metropolitan PUMA. In all, the sample contains 1,718 newcomers to nonmetropolitan locations in the Northwest, or roughly 15% of the total sample. Of the 1,718 newcomers, 1,367 came from the 11 Western states. Washington, California, Oregon, and Montana provide the largest number of newcomers in the sample, and eight of the top ten states of origin are found in the West, with the only exceptions being T exas (number 5) and North Dakota (number 10).

Figure 2 displays the geography of the newcomer population.  The  map  shows  location quotients calculated in terms of the ratio of percent newcomers in each PUMA to the percent newcomers for the region as a whole. It appears that nonmetropolitan newcomers are concentrated in several areas and strikingly absent from others. The more agricultural-dependent areas of Eastern Montanaand Southern Idaho receive less than their share of metropolitan origin in-migrants, while the coastal areas of Oregon and Washington as well as the Bitterroot Valley and Mountains of Western Montana show marked concentrations of newcomers. From this cartographic representation, it ap- pears that metropolitan adjacency plays a role where newcomers move. Indeed, four of the five most attractive PUMAs to newcomers are adjacent to metropolitan areas, yet it would be reckless to dismiss this recent growth as entirely metropolitan spillover. Figure 1 shows rapid populationgrowthtobeverywidespreadinboth adjacent and nonadjacent  counties.  Furthermore, the aggregation of counties into PUMAs makes almost all PUMAs adjacent to a metropolitan area, and four of the six least attractive PUMAsare also adjacent to metropolitan areas. Finally, one of the PUMAs most removed from a metropolitan area (on the Idaho-Montana border) falls in the highest quartile. In sum, the spatial distribution of newcomers suggests that both proximity to metropolitan areas as well as some type of environmental amenity characterize migrant destinations. This finding supports the work of Rasker (1995) and others (e.g., Power 1996) in their emphasis on both access and amenities in migrant attraction.

## Bivariate Comparisons

An analysis of socioeconomic characteristics at the individual level will both provide an understanding of the economic forces enabling nonmetropolitan migration and lead to a possible understanding of the basis for the reported conflict surrounding this growth. T able 1 contains simple economic comparisons of the two populations. There are several key points to be made fromT able 1. First, on average, newcomers work fewer hours per week than oldtimers. This difference likely explains the significantly higher

Figure 2: Geographical distribution of metropolitan-origin newcomers.

<!-- image -->

Table 1 Comparison of Newcomers and Oldtimers: Socioeconomic Characteristics

|                           | Difference of Means   | Difference of Means   | Difference of Means   | Difference of Means   |
|---------------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|-----------------------|
| Variable                  | Newcomer              | Oldtimer              | F-Statistic           | Sig. of F             |
| Age                       | 35                    | 39                    | 116.20                | 0.00                  |
| Hours worked              | 22                    | 27                    | 52.10                 | 0.00                  |
| Wage & salary income      | $14,255               | $16,476               | 19.00                 | 0.00                  |
| Nonfarm employment income | $15,143               | $13,812               | 0.48                  | 0.49                  |
| Farm employment income    | $5,174                | $12,931               | 2.41                  | 0.12                  |
| Nonearnings income        | $6,432                | $5,246                | 7 .78                 | 0.01                  |

Source: 1990 PUMS.

wageandsalary incomeearnedby oldtimers. On the basis of earnings alone, one would conclude that  oldtimers occupy  higher  socioeconomic positions as they earn over $2,000 more than newcomers each year.

A more complex picture begins to develop, however, when examining nonearnings income, which is more footloose. On average, newcomers enjoy nearly $1,200 more than oldtimers from nonearnings income (nonearnings income is the sum of dividends, interest, rent, transfer payments, retirement income, social security, and public assistance). While this may in part be a reflection of early retirees living off of social security, pensions, and other accumulations of wealth, newcomers are also on average younger than oldtimers, indicating that the picture is more complex than simply the effects of early retirees. Other sources of income show that other differences exist between newcomers and oldtimers as well. The PUMS divides the selfemployed into farm and nonfarm proprietors. While the differences between the two populations with respect to self-employment income achieve only moderate statistical significance at best, the direction of the differences seems logical. Oldtimers receive more farm income compared with newcomers, but again any conclusions from the comparison of self-employment income must be made with caution. Nonetheless, based  on this  simple economic comparison, it appears that on average, oldtimers appear more dependent on  work, earned income, and farming (one of the traditional production sectors of the region' s economy), while the younger newcomers enjoy more footloose income from nonearnings sources and work fewer hours per week. The implications of these differences are revisited near the end of this paper.

The comparison of means indicates that differences exist between newcomers and oldtimers on sources of income, but solely comparing mean values masks the tremendous amount of variation within each of these populations. Indeed, examining the distribution of each group across the range of values shows internal diversity within newcomers and oldtimers, and it is likely that this internal variation results in the lack of statistically significant findings from some of the comparisons of means reported above. T able 2 provides the quartile and top 5% breakpoints for newcomers and oldtimers on variables that show the most interesting distributions. For both nonfarm self-employment and nonearnings income, the differences between newcomers and oldtimers at the upper margin become extreme. The top 5% of newcomers receive $8,000 more from nonearnings sources compared with the oldtimer population, and the top 5% of newcomer nonfarm proprietors earn $20,000 more than the oldtimers, a 40% differential.

Table 2 Newcomer and Oldtimer Distributions: Nonearnings Income and Nonfarm Self Employment Income

| Variable                | Lower Quartile Breakpoint   | Median Breakpoint   | Upper Quartile Breakpoint   | Upper5% Breakpoint   |
|-------------------------|-----------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------|----------------------|
| Nonearnings             |                             |                     |                             |                      |
| Newcomers               | $300                        | $2,000              | $7 ,000                     | $28,000              |
| Oldtimers               | $369                        | $2,379              | $6,095                      | $20,100              |
| Nonfarm self employment |                             |                     |                             |                      |
| Newcomers               | $1,000                      | $5,303              | $20,000                     | $70,000              |
| Oldtimers               | $1,936                      | $7 ,500             | $19,000                     | $50,000              |

Source: 1990 PUMS.

At the lower ends of the distribution, there appear to be differences between the two populations as well. In the lower quartile, oldtimers earn higher levels from nonfarm proprietorships and enjoy higher levels of nonearnings income. This reversal of relative position from the mean and high end of the distribution to the low end of the distribution suggests a high degree of internal variation within the newcomer population. Newcomers do not uniformly enjoy high levels of nonearnings income and self-employment income, but rather there appear to be at least two separate groups of nonmetropolitan newcomers: one with apparently high levels of economic means, and one with more limited financial resources.

In addition to information pertaining to income levels and sources, the PUMS also provides information on the value of residence in which individuals live. Unfortunately, the value of residence variables are not integers, but are instead coded into 25 ranges of values, so it is not possible to calculate means. Nonetheless, looking at the relative concentrations of newcomers and oldtimers in each of the value ranges sheds additional light on the differences between the two populations. Figure 3 displays the relative concentrations of newcomers and oldtimers residing in residences of a particular value, and the display shows the two populations to have quite different distributions across the range of residential values. It appears that newcomers have a bifurcated distribution with respect to residential value. They show overrepresentations at both the low end (less than $15,000) and the high end (greater than $90,000) of the value spectrum. The overrepresentation is extremely evident at values over $125,000, where the percentage of newcomers

Table 3 Discriminant Coefficients

|                        | Model 1: All PUMAs   | Model 1: All PUMAs   | Model 2: High Growth PUMAs   | Model 2: High Growth PUMAs   |
|------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|
| Variable               | Coefficient          | Significance         | Coefficient                  | Significance                 |
| Age                    | -0.495               | 0.12                 | -0.324                       | 0.472                        |
| Hours                  | -0.495               | 0.00                 | -0.725                       | 0.000                        |
| Wage & salary income   | -0.062               | 0.24                 | -0.155                       | 0.042                        |
| Nonearnings income     | 0.602                | 0.00                 | 0.388                        | 0.012                        |
| Residential value      | 0.481                | 0.00                 | 0.386                        | 0.066                        |
| Canonical correlation  | 0.1855               |                      | 0.1955                       |                              |
| Significance of model  | 0.0000               |                      | 0.0000                       |                              |
| Classification results |                      |                      |                              |                              |
| %Correct: Newcomers    | 54.3%                |                      | 57 .0%                       |                              |
| %Correct: Oldtimers    | 69.5%                |                      | 68.0%                        |                              |
| %Correct:Total         | 67 .9%               |                      | 66.6%                        |                              |

Source: 1990 PUMS.

(17.6%) is nearly twice that of oldtimers (9.8%). Again, however, the distribution suggests diversity within the newcomer population. There are concentrations of newcomers in both highly valued housing and those in more modest residences.

## Multivariate Discriminant Models

The simple comparisons above show that certain differences exist between newcomers and oldtimers on isolated socioeconomic variables, yet simple comparisons do not take into consideration fluctuations in other variables. For example, newcomers enjoy significantly higher levels of nonearnings income, but are these differences simply the influence of wealthy older newcomers inflating the average nonearnings income level for the entire newcomer population? The question remains as to how these socioeconomic variables combine to differentiate newcomers from oldtimers. The final phase of the analysis presents a set of more powerful discriminant models based on the results from the simple comparisons shown in T able 1. Discriminant analysis allows for the comparison of two populations on multiple variables simultaneously. Discriminant analysis is used to test how well data fit into categories, and, like other multivariate techniques, it can isolate the unique effects of a single variable while controlling for fluctuations in other variables included in the model. In the context of this study examining the  socioeconomic differences between newcomers and oldtimers, such an approach is extremely useful, as socioeconomic variables can be highly interrelated. For example, individuals living in residences of higher value are also likely to enjoy higher levels of earnings and nonearnings income.

Figure 3: Comparison of newcomers and oldtimers: Value of residence.

<!-- image -->

The results from two different discriminant models are presented in T able 3. The analysis notedaboveindicatesthat,onaverage,newcomers enjoy higher levels of nonearnings income, while oldtimers earn more income at work. Also, Figure 3 shows that newcomers tend to live in residences of higher value relative to oldtimers. These socioeconomicvariablesaswellasageandhoursworked were used to construct the discriminant models. Both models entered all variables simultaneously to determine the combined effects of all variables in distinguishing between newcomers and oldtimers. The first model was estimated for the entire study region, and the second model was limited to high-growth areas. High-growth PUMAs were designated as those areas with location quotients, as calculated for Figure 2, falling in the highestquartile.Thepurposeofisolatingthehighgrowth areas into their own model was to determine if there were unique characteristics of areas experiencing  relatively higher-than-expected flows of newcomers.

Model 1, while controlling for fluctuations in other variables, shows that newcomers remain younger, work less, live in residences of higher value, and enjoy higher levels of nonearnings income. Interestingly,  the  coefficient on the wage and salary income variable is the smallest in the model and is not statistically significant. It appears that hours worked and age 'explain away' any differences between the two populations with respect to earnings, leaving it effectively powerless in distinguishing newcomers from oldtimers. Conversely, even when fluctuations in age, earnings, and hours worked are controlled, nonearnings income and residential value are quite powerful differentiators between newcomers and oldtimers in the nonmetropolitan Northwest. Overall, model 1 accurately predicts the group membership of nearly 68% of the entire sample, but it is much better at correctly predicting oldtimers (69.5% correct) than newcomers(54.3%correct).Thisdiscrepancyin classification results suggests that the newcomer population  is more heterogeneous than the oldtimer population.

The results for the second model are largely similar. Each of the coefficients has the same influence on newcomer or oldtimer status. Age, hours, and earnings are all higher for oldtimers even when variations in the other variables are controlled. In the high-growth PUMAs, however, wage and salary income is a significant differentiator  between the two  populations. When controlling for age, each of the other variables in the model exert statistically significant power in distinguishing newcomers from oldtimers. It appears, then, in high-growth areas, in spite of age and hours worked differences, earnings and nonearnings income both distinguish newcomers from oldtimers. This suggests that in the high-growth areas, there may be a polarization occurring between a work/production-oriented oldtimer population and a nonearnings/consumption-oriented newcomer population similar to  the  shift  described  by Brown (1993). This suggestion, however,  is merely speculative and obviously requires further investigation. Finally, the classification results are largely similar, with newcomers slightly better  classified  in model  2  compared with model 1 and vice versa for oldtimers.

## Discussion and Conclusions

The nonmetropolitan Northwest has enjoyed growth rates exceeding the national average for over a decade, and this growth is largely a result of people choosing to migrate to areas filled with natural amenities and high quality of life characteristics (Dillman et al. 1995; Rasker 1995; Beyers andLindahl1996;Salant et al. 1997). This conclusion is difficult to refute. Simply describing growth in this region, however, is not completely satisfying. It is crucial to understand both the economic forces enabling this growth and the impacts growth has on receiving communities. The socioeconomic analysis in this paper indicates that the sourcesofincomefornewcomersdifferfromthose ofoldtimers,withnewcomersbeingmoredependentonnonearningsandnonfarmselfemployment. It is possible that nonearnings income allows newcomers to be more footloose and free to locate wherever they choose, and those sampled in this study have chosen nonmetropolitan locations. While there does not appear to be a visible economic base supporting this recent growth, individuals with nonearnings income and nonfarm proprietors can themselves provide an economic base to receiving communities. Indeed, several rural areas have actively recruited individuals with thisfootlooseincomeasaneconomicdevelopment strategy. So, from one perspective, this population movement can be seen as a boost to the local economy.

The popular news media, however, has characterized this growth as contentious, and prior

academic research in changing rural communities has shown population growth to be a challenge to small places. In addition to the comparative analysis, this paper has provided a starting point for understanding the reported conflict by examining the socioeconomic differences of the affected populations. It is possible that the alleged conflict between newcomers and oldtimers  is  a product  of shifting  economic (mis)fortunes and may become heightened as socioeconomic differences become more evident in nonmetropolitan areas.

Currently,  oldtimers are  feeling economic pinches from at least two possible sources. First, directly linked to the newcomers is an escalation in property values stimulated by real estate speculation in anticipation of further in-migration. Longtime property owners now face higher assessed values for their land, which translate into higher property taxes. The analysis in this paper shows that newcomers live in more highly valued residences compared with oldtimers. If this preference continues, and migrants continue to seek more desirable nonmetropolitan settings, property values will continue to rise, placing added economic  stress on oldtime  property owners. It should also be noted that the analysis excluded persons over the age of 65 who undoubtedly contribute to escalating property values. Even with this exclusion,  however,  the discriminant analysis suggests that newcomers contribute to property escalation regardless of age. A further implication of land value escalation has to do with family. Often echoed in oldtimer complaints is the idea that their children can no longer afford to purchase homes in the area because property values are too high. The rising real estate market, then, threatens to force younger members of the community away in search of more affordable housing. Admittedly, escalating property values as a basis for conflict is merely speculative, and cannot be tested with the PUMS data. Nonetheless, the data indicate that it is a possibility and should be examined in more depth in future research.

A second source of economic stress relevant to the socioeconomic differentials uncovered in this paper relates to the stake newcomers and oldtimers have in the fate of the local economy. These analyses displayed that newcomers have higher nonearnings income levels. In  other words, newcomers are less dependent on their work in the local economy for their economic well-being. Conversely, oldtimers have a higher dependence on earned income and farming sources, suggesting that they are much more closely tied to the fate of local economic activity. Cox and Mair (1988) describe this as local dependency and show that political attitudes are often shaped by a person's degree of local dependency.Greenetal.(1996)alsousethisnotion of local dependency to explain tensions in a rural community.Asgovernmentalregulations,international competition, and transnational capital begin to dictate the economic future of many nonmetropolitan areas, many of the traditional economic sectors supporting these areas have suffered stagnation or decline, causing those locally dependent to be economically pinched. At the same time, newcomers enter these communities and can prosper, as their economic fortunes are not always tied to local investments.

A further conclusion from this study is that a simplistic dualism classifying newcomers and oldtimers neglects the internal complexity and variation within each of these populations. T able 2 and Figure 3 show newcomers to be more diverse than a simple dichotomous categorization suggests. There appear to be both wealthy newcomers with high levels of nonearnings income living in highly valued residences as well as poor newcomers living in very low valued residences without the economic means of other in-migrants. Such a split distribution suggests that newcomers are not a homogeneous group, but rather an  internally diverse  population. Cloke and Thrift's (1990) critique of such dualisms appears warranted based on the analysis in this paper. This work, then, should not be an end in and of itself, but instead should serve as a point of departure for future research efforts exploring rural restructuring.

Finally, the analysis indicates that socioeconomic differences do exist between newcomers and oldtimers, but the differences do not seem to be great enough to warrant the stories appearing so regularly in the popular news media. The frequency of the news stories and the language used in them (e.g., 'the west at war,' Elliott et al. 1995) suggest the conflict to be tremendous and present throughout the region. Recent field visits to rural communities, however, indicate that while growth is widespread, the conflict surrounding growth is not uniform across the region. Thus, in addition to further exploring internal  diversity within the  newcomer and

oldtimer populations, future research should examine specific growth-related conflicts in specific areas to  determine the  bases for these conflicts 'on the ground' rather than generalizing across the region and committing the ecological fallacy. n

## Literature Cited

- Beale, C. 1997. Forces underlying the recent rebound of rural areas and small towns. Charles Tiebout Lecture , 31st Annual Meetings of the Pacific Northwest Regional Economic Conference, Spokane, Washington, April 24-26.
- Beyers, W. B., and D. P . Lindahl. 1996. Lone eagles and high fliers in rural producer services. Rural Development Perspectives 11:2-10.
- Brown, R. B. 1993. Rural community satisfaction and attachment in mass consumer society. Rural Sociology 58:387-403.
- Brown, R. B., H. Geersten, and R. S. Krannich. 1989. Community satisfaction and social integration in a boomtown: A longitudinal analysis. Rural Sociology 54:568-86.
- Clark, W.A.V . 1986. Human Migration . Beverly Hills: Sage.
- Clayton, J. 1996. Newcomers a challenge for rural western towns. Seattle Times . Opinion section, October 9:B7.
- Cloke, P ., and N. Thrift. 1990. Class and change in rural Britain. In Rural Restructuring: Global Processes and Their Responses , ed. T . Marsden, P . Lowe, and S. Whatmore, 165-81. London: David Fulton.
- Cox, K., and A. Mair. 1988. Locality and community in the politics of local economic development. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 78:307-25.
- Dillman, D., P . Salant, and L. Carley. 1995. The Influence of Information T echnologies on Long Distance Migration: Differences between Metropolitan and Nonmetropolitan In-Migrants. Pullman, WA: Social and Economic Sciences Research Center, Washington State University.
- Egan, T. 1993. Boomtown, U.S.A.: Welcome to Boise, leading a Rocky Mountain revival. T oo good to be true? NewYork Times November 14: Section 3, p. 1.
- Elliott, M., S. McGuire, A. Murr, and D. Glick. 1995. The west at war. Newsweek July 17:24-28.
- Farley, C. J. 1995. Sorry no vacancies: Worried that their way of life is threatened, Rocky Mountain residents fight growth. Time . August 7:34-35.
- Ferguson,  T. W.  1994. Treading warily between worlds in the west. Wall Street Journal August 8: A13.
- Freudenberg,  W.  R.  1982. The  impacts of rapid growth on the social and personal well-being of
- local community residents. In Coping With Rapid Growth in Rural Communities , ed. B. Weber and R. E. Howell, 137-70. Boulder: Westview.
- Green,G.P ., D. Marcouiller, S. Deller, D. Erkkila, and N. R. Sumathi. 1996. Local dependency, land use attitudes, and economic development: Comparisons between seasonal and permanent residents. Rural Sociology 61:427-45.
- Johnson, J., and R. Rasker. 1995. The role of economic and quality of life values in rural business location. Journal of Rural Studies 11:405-16.
- Johnson, K. M., and C. Beale. 1994. The recentrevival of widespread population growth in nonmetropolitan areas of the United States. Rural Sociology 59: 655-67.
- Naples, N. 1994. Contractions in agrarian ideology: Restructuring gender, race-ethnicity, and class. Rural Sociology 59:110-35.
- Nelson, P. B. 1997. The missing link? Sources of income and recent population growth in the nonmetropolitan West. Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the Association of American Geographers, Fort Worth, T exas, April 1-5.
- Power, T. 1996. Lost Landscapes and Failed Economies . Washington, DC: Island Press.
- Rank, M. R., and P . R. Voss. 1982. Patterns of rural community involvement: A comparison of residents and recent inmigrants. Rural Sociology 47: 197-219.
- Rasker, R. 1995. An Economic Overview of the Interior Columbia River Basin: Facts, Myths, and Challenges for Ecosystem Management . Bozeman, MT: Wilderness Society.
- Rudzitis, G., and H. Johansen. 1989. Migration to western wilderness counties: Causes and consequences. Western Wildlands . Spring: 19-23.
- Salant, P., D. Dillman, and L. Carley. 1997. Who's Moving the Nonmetropolitan Counties? Evidence from Washington State . Pullman, WA: Social and EconomicSciencesResearchCenter,WashingtonState University.
- U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1992. 1990 Public Use Microdata Samples: Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
- U.S. Department of Commerce. Bureau of the Census. 1992. 1990 Public Use Microdata Samples: Technical Documentation . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.

PETER B. NELSON is a graduate student fellow at the University of Washington, Department of Geography, Seattle, WA 98195. His current research examines the economic restructuring in rural America with an emphasis on migration and community change.