Zelinsky, W.  1994. Conventionland USA: The geography of a latterday phenomenon. Annuls o f the Association o f American Geographers 84(  1):68-86.

JAMES E. RANDALL (Ph.D., University of Washington)  is Associate Professor  of  Geography at the University of Saskatchewan, 9 Campus Drive, Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan,  Canada  S7N  SAS.  E-mail: RANDALL@SASK.USASK.CA.  His principal areas of interest are regional  economic development  and urban  planning, with a special interest in resourcedependent communities and informal  production.

BARNEY WARF (Ph.D., University of Washington) is Associate Professor of  Geography at Florida State University,  Tallahassee,  FL 32306-2050. E-mail: BWARF@COSS.FSU.EDU.  He  is  an  economic/ industrial  geographer with  research  interests  in  the geography of financial services, telecommunications, political economy, and world trade.

## The Geography of the 1994 Nordic Vote on European Union Membership*

## Alexander B. Murphy and Anne Hunderi-Ely

University o f Oregon

In  1994, support for European Union (EU) membership was highly variable across Norway, Sweden, and Finland. The 'no' vote was strongest in rural areas eligible for substantial EU subsidies.  Moreover,  the majority voted against EU membership in Norway. To explain these outcomes, this article focuses on the ways in which local and national differences mediated  interpretations of  the issues raised  during the campaign. The  analysis  highlights important forces shaping northern Europe today and their implications for the EU in the years ahead. Key Words: Nordic countries, European Union, electoral geography, urban-rural.

uring the fall of  1994, the voters in NorD way,  Sweden, and  Finland  went  to  the polls to decide whether their countries should join the European Union (EU). The outcome of  the  vote  revealed  significant political  and cultural differences both between Norway and its neighbors and between the urbanized  core of  northern  Europe  and  the  rural  periphery. There has been little post-referenda analysis of the electoral geography of the Nordic vote on EU membership,  however. As a  step  toward filling this void, this article focuses on the nature and significance of the general patterns of support  for  EU  membership  that  emerged from the referenda. The Nordic  vote is deserving of attention because the final outcome has important implications for the individual countries of the  European north  and because it offers insights into issues facing Scandinavia and  Europe  today. Moreover,  since many  of the 'no'  votes on EU membership came from individuals  living in regions that were expected to receive substantial subsidies within the EU, the Nordic vote highlights the need to go beyond neoclassical economic expectancies to explain voting behavior.

## Background

The first Nordic country to vote on EU membership was Finland (Table 1). On October 16, 1994, 57%  of  the Finnish population voted in favor  of  membership.  The  'yes'  and  'no' votes  were  not  evenly  distributed  across  the

*Research  for this pnper was supported by the U S   National  Science Foundation under grant no.  SBR-91i7667. A version of this paper was presented at the 1995 annual meeung of the Association of American Geographers. The authors are grateful to Nancy Leeper and  Patrick Bartlein for assistance  with the figures, and to Herman van der Wusten,  Sarah Shafer, David Hodge, and three anonymous reviewers for comments on earlier drafts.

Table 1 The Vote on European Union Membership

| Country   | Turnout   | 'Yes' Votes   | 'No' Votes   |
|-----------|-----------|---------------|--------------|
| Finland   | 74.0%     | 56.9%         | 43 1 Yo      |
| Sweden    | 82.4%     | 52.2%         | 46 9Yo       |
| Norway    | 88.6%     | 47.7%         | 52.3%        |

country,  however. As Figure  1 reveals,  'no' votes were concentrated heavily in the northern part of the country, whereas those living in the  more  urbanized,  densely populated  south voted  in  favor  of  membership.  The  Swedes followed a similar pattern when they voted on membership  on  November  13,  1994.  Once again EU membership was carried by those in the more  urbanized areas: the Stockholm, Goteberg, and Malmo metropolitan areas. The margin  of  victory  in  Sweden  was  narrower than  in  Finland,  however, with  only  52%  of the population favoring EU membership. The Norwegians,  by  contrast,  rejected  EU membership by a vote of 52% to 48% on November  28,  1994. Once again, those  voting  'no' were concentrated  in the rural north, whereas those favoring EU membership were concentrated  around Oslo.

Voter turnout was relatively high in all three Nordic countries  voting  on EU membership. Surprisingly, Finland  had  the  lowest turnout (74%), even though a majority of the Finns felt that they were participating in the most important  decision  their  country  had  made  in  decades (Pesonen 1994, 10).  In Norway and Sweden,  well  over  80%  of  the  population  cast a vote.  Given  these  high  participation  figures, the  final vote  provides  a  good  picture  of  the views of most Finns, Swedes, and Norwegians on EU membership in the fall of  1994. One of the most striking features of those views is the extraordinary  continuity  in  the  geography  of the vote from country to country. In each case the majority of those in the densely populated urban core-particularly the national capitals-favored membership, whereas the majority  of  those  in  the  areas  far  from  that  core rejected the European Union (compare Figs. 1 and 2).

The extent to which the vote was polarized along urban-rural lines can be seen by looking more  closely at the  relationship  between  the strength  of  support  for  EU membership  and the  population  densities  of  the  Nordic provinces  or  counties.  Figure 3- a plot  of  that relationship-shows a  strong correlation  between population  density and  the strength  of the  'yes' vote.  Even  more  significantly, the figure  shows that strong 'no' votes  occurred solely  in  relatively  low-density  counties  and provinces (group E), whereas all of  the largest cities  (group A) favored  EU  membership. There was some diversity of voting preferences in  low-  and  medium-density counties and provinces (especially group D), but in all cases where  a  majority  of  the  population  voted  in favor of EU membership, the county or province either contained a large city or was closely tied to a large city. The latter point can be seen in  Figure  4,  which shows that those  counties and provinces in  group B are all immediately adjacent  to  large  urban  areas, and  that  those counties and provinces in  group  C are within the hinterlands  of these urban  areas. Figure 4 thus  confirms  that  support  for  EU membership  was  closely tied  to  distance  from  major centers  of business,  finance,  transportation, and communication.

An  analysis  of the  relationship between population density and voting at the county or province level is  suggestive only of  very general patterns.  Moreover, in  many cases where EU membership lost or won by a narrow margin, population  density cannot be viewed as  a strong predictor  of voting attitudes. Nonetheless,  the  fact  that  no  low-to-medium  density area  voted  for  EU membership  and  that  the 'yes' vote  was  strongest  in  and  around  the large cities shows that the arguments raised in favor  of  EU  membership  were  most  sympathetically  received  by  those  whose  lives  and livelihoods are tied to the economic and political centers of gravity of  the Nordic countries. This  would  seem  fairly  straightforward  if  it were not for one rather striking fact: the areas with the strong 'no'  votes were precisely those areas that had been designated for special EU assistance  in the treaties specifying  membership terms for each of the countries (Msnnesland  1994, 68). Indeed, a map of areas eligible for special EU assistance under a pro-

Figure 1: The  1994 Nordic vote on  European Union membership.  Source, Bergens ldene 1994, 8 ; Skjorstad  1994, 7, Huvfudstadsbladet 1994, 9.

<!-- image -->

gram  that  provides subsidies  to  regions  with fewer than  eight people per  square kilometer (Fig. 5) bears a strong resemblance to the maps of 'no' votes on EU membership.

The  proposed  EU  subsidies  for  northern Europe  are  more  than  cosmetic; regions  that can take advantage of them stand to gain substantial economic benefits (Molle 1994).  Moreover, analyses focused on the Nordic countries show  that  EU  membership  would actually work against the  economic interests  of  industrial and manufacturing concerns concentrated

Figure  2: Population  density  in  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland  by  county  or  province.  Source: Henriksen 1992, 156; Wastenson 1992,  112; Statistical Yearbook of Finland 1985,  1 I .

<!-- image -->

in the urbanized Scandinavian  core.  In  a preelection  study  of  the impacts of  membership on Norway, for example, Knut Halvorsen (1993)  noted that  the  major  urban  regions were  dominated  by  sensitive  manufacturing sectors in  a weak  competitive position  within the  European Economic  Area.  Since  these economic realities would leave urban  areas in a  vulnerable  position within an integrated European  Union,  Halvorsen  concluded  that peripheral Norwegian regions would fare much better  than their urban counterparts within the

Figure 3 : Relationship between support  for  European  Union membership  and population density in the  Nordic  counties and  provinces.  The relationship  is  described by  the indicator-variable regression equations: fal for  Norway  and Sweden: vote = 24.8 + 16. 134'logr0 (population density), and  (b) for Ffnland: vote = 32.9 + 16.134*log~0 (population density) (R2 = .765; p. = 0.000).

<!-- image -->

EU, especially since the peripheral regions are eligible for  Objective 6  Structural Funds  (i.e., funds designed 'to promote  the  development and  structural  adjustment  of  regions  with  an extremely low population density').

The Norwegian vote-and indeed the Nordic vote  more  generally-thus cannot be  explained by reference to simple economic forecasts. Those living in areas that were predicted to reap the greatest fiscal rewards from a decision  to  join  the  EU  generally voted  against membership, whereas those living in areas ex- pected to suffer some negative economic consequences from membership voted overwhelmingly in favor of membership. To make sense of  the  outcome,  consideration  must  be given  to  the  political,  social,  and  economic contexts within  which  the vote  took  place. A focus  on  context  is  important  if  the  social forces  underlying  voting  patterns  are  to  be discerned and if the implications of those patterns  are  to  be  grasped  (see,  e.g., Johnston 1986; Murphy  1990; Agnew 1996). A concern with  these  matters  led  Agnew  to  argue  that

Figure 4: The Nordic counties and provinces as grouped /n Figure  3.

<!-- image -->

electoral geographers should shift their attention 'from the psychology of individual voters and  their  census  attributes  to  the  history  of places and parties' (Agnew  1990, 18).

A broad contextual approach makes sense in studying  the  Nordic  referenda  on  EU  mem- bership,  where  the debates  leading up  to  the vote focused on everything from lifestyle changes to economics to sovereignty. The arguments advanced for and against membership were interpreted  differently depending on the historical and geographical context from which

Figure 5: Areas eligible for  Objective 6 EU  funds in Norway. Sweden, and Finland.

<!-- image -->

they were viewed. To demonstrate  the nature and significance of  this point, we turn first to the principal issues that were raised during the campaign. We then  look at how those  issues were viewed  at two  different  scales: the  state and  the  local.  Examining the  problem  at two scales  is  important  because  both  are  foci  of political identification that influence, in different  ways,  people's  perceptions  of  the  world around them.

## Issues and Attitudes  in the Nordic Referenda

The campaign on EU membership dominated political life in Norway,  Sweden, and Finland for many months (see generally Pesonen  1994; Center  for European  Policy Studies 1994). In Finland  and  Sweden,  coalitions  favoring  EU membership  were  much  better  funded  than their opponents (Dahle 1994).  Moreover, most prominent politicians and business leaders came out in favor of E U   membership. In Norway,  by contrast, the 'no' coalition was  comparatively  well  funded  and  some  important public figures came out against E U  membership.  Consequently,  the  Norwegian debate tended  to be more even-handed.

## The  'Yes ' Campaign

Throughout  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland, those  favoring  EU  membership  focused  on three key issues during the campaign: access to EU markets,  enhanced  political  influence  in Europe,  and  the  importance  of  the  EU  as  a framework  for  ensuring  peace  and  security. Turning to  the  first  issue, Norway,  Sweden, and Finland export 64% of their goods to the EU (Waller 1994, 12), and access to EU markets  therefore  looms  large  in  the  European north. Easy access to EU markets is especially important for Finland and Sweden, which have suffered through  a serious recession in recent years and face high unemployment rates. Norway's economy has fared much better  because of  its  reliance  on  exports  that  are  always  in demand  (oil  and  gas).  Nevertheless,  even  in Norway those who cast a  'yes' vote cited access to EU markets as the second most important  reason  for  voting  the  way  that  they  did (Dagbaldet 1994).

The second issue in the campaign-political influence-is important  in  the  Nordic  countries  because  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland became subject to most European Community (EC)  directives  and  regulations  without  any direct  input  into  the  policy-making  process when  they  joined  the  European  Economic Area  (EEA) (see generally Wallace 1992).  The decision to join the EEA actually followed the decision of  the governments of Norway, Sweden, and Finland to apply for EC membership. Joining the EEA was seen as a step that would ease  the  transition  process  and  ensure  good trade relations with the  rest  of  Europe.  Once the  Nordic  countries  became  a  part  of  the EEA, however, the push for full EC (later EU) membership  intensified.  This  occurred because  Norway,  Sweden,  and  Finland  found themselves  in  an  economic  bloc  over  which they  had  little  control;  the  only  way  to  gain that  control  was  to  become  a  full  EC/EU member  (Strem  1992). This  point  was  frequently made by advocates of EU membership as  Norway,  Sweden, and  Finland  moved  toward the fall  1994  vote. Indeed, in the months leading up to the vote, increased participation in decision making and closer cooperation with the rest of Europe on issues of trade, environmental protection, and security were the most frequently  cited  reasons  for  joining  the  EU (Dagbaldet 1994).

The third focus of the campaign in favor of EU membership was the potential importance of the EU as a framework for promoting peace and security in Europe. Peace has been one of Sweden's  greatest foreign policy  concerns, with that  country's  Social  Democrats constructing  much  of  their  international  agenda around  peace  issues.  Peace  and  security  are also issues in Norway, where government leaders  have  repeatedly  expressed  concern  over NATO's  declining  importance.  For  Finland, peace and security were of paramount importance  as  that country moved to extricate itself from the Soviet shadow. Playing off these concerns, the 'yes' coalition argued  that  extending the  EU into  the  Nordic countries  would ensure that European problems would be dealt with in a nonviolent, cooperative manner.

## The  'No Campaign

Those  campaigning  against  EU  membership in  Noway,  Sweden, and  Finland  focused  on three  principal  issues:  loss of  sovereignty, the decline of  rural  areas, and  the  economic cost of membership. The sovereignty issue loomed largest  of  all.  Opponents  of  greater  Nordic participation  in the  EU painted a  picture  of  a distant,  unresponsive bureaucracy in  Brussels dictating  rules  and  regulations  that  had  long been  within  the  purview  of  individual states (Raza 1994).  During  the campaign,  Anne Enger Lahnstein from Norway's Center Party even called  the  EU 'undemocratic' (Segaard 1994). Her concerns reflected a  belief that,  if Norway  joined  the  EU,  important  decisions

about the  country's economy would  be  made by  the council of  the EU, which is comprised of  officials  who  are  not  directly  elected  and who meet in private (Hansen 1994).  Moreover, many noted  that the country would have only 3 votes out of 90 on European Council matters that  do not  require  unanimity, including economic,  social,  and  environmental  directives and regulations that could greatly affect Norway's  fishing  and  timber  resources (Nationen 1994b).

Closely related  to  the  issue  of  sovereignty was  the  concern  advanced by  the  'no' campaign that EU membership would precipitate the  depopulation  of  the  rural  sector  and  the destruction  of  rural  culture.  Those  opposing EU membership argued that EU regional subsidies  are  targeted  for  such  matters  as  infrastructure renewal and job retraining;  they are therefore designed to help poor regions to develop and, more generally, to ease the process of  economic restructuring  (Almbs et al.  1994, 14).  Supporters  of  the  'no' campaign  noted that  peripheral  regions  might  benefit  financially from EU subsidies, but only at the price of a form of economic restructuring that would be  devastating to local  areas. They painted  a picture  of  massive  rural-to-urban  migration and  the  devastation  of  traditional  modes  of livelihood in the rural sector (Syverud  1994).

On the economic front, the ''no'' campaign argued  that  EU  membership  would  expose Nordic products to intense  competition  from other  EU Member  States (Nytt Fra Norge 1994). Attention  focused  particularly  on  the agricultural sector, where production  costs per acre are generally higher  in northern Europe than farther south. Opponents of EU  membership expressed great concern that the importation  of  cheap  agricultural products  into Norway,  Sweden, and  Finland  would  undermine the economies of the Nordic countries, as well as contribute to rural change as outlined above. In a  somewhat different vein, the 'no' campaign also argued that EU membership would not  bring  the  economic boon  that  the  'yes' forces were claiming because Norway, Sweden, and  Finland  would  have  to  give  more  to the EU in  the way  of  subsidies than  they  would receive in return (Nationen 1994a).  T o   substantiate the point,  they highlighted the comparatively large contribution to the EU that Denmark has made in recent years.

In  summary, proponents  and  opponents  of EU membership stressed different points during the campaigns. A s in  any campaign, exaggerated claims were made on both  sides. The point of  this  overview is  not to probe  the accuracy of the  statements  made, however; it is instead to shed light on why people voted the way  that they  did  and to consider what those votes suggest about ideas and attitudes in contemporary Europe. Toward that end, it is useful  to  consider  the  issues  raised  in  the  campaign  in  light  of  electoral  outcomes  at  the national and subnational levels.

## Mediating Factors at the National Level

Norway, Sweden, and Finland have distinctive political, economic,  social, and  cultural  attributes and, for many, these influenced how the arguments surrounding EU membership were understood  and interpreted. A brief  examination  of  the  situation  of  each  of  the  Nordic countries  that  voted  on  EU membership  can thus provide insight into the variable successes of  the  'yes' and  'no' campaigns in  northern Europe.

## Finland

In many respects Finland's human  geography would seem to lend itself to the kinds of local and regional issues advanced by the 'no' campaign. Large segments of the population have long  enjoyed  considerable autonomy  because of  the  scattered character of settlement in the country and the modest pace of modernization (Msnnesland  1994). A relatively dispersed settlement  pattern  has  been  sustained  even  in modem times by  a need  for seasonal labor in peripheral locations and by the desire to niaintain  settlements  in  strategic  areas  along  the border with Russia. People cleared virgin land for farms as late as the  1950s, making parts of Finland  the most  recently  settled  agricultural frontier in Europe, and agriculture remains an important  source of  livelihood  for  many  (Johansen  1993).

As is  evident  from  Figure  4,  many in  Finland's agricultural and resource-extraction communities were concerned about the implications of  EU membership, but the impact of the local and regional arguments raised by the 'no' campaign was  outweighed by the strong

national desire to move away from Russia  and toward  Europe  (Westengen  1994). Finland's uneasy relationship with Russia has profoundly affected the country's politics, economics, and especially foreign policy in the post-Soviet era. Resentment  of  the  long period  of  Soviet hegemony  runs  deep;  with  the  collapse  of  the Soviet Union many in Finland have been anxious to distance themselves as much as possible from  Russia  (Sutela  1994). Moreover,  recent political  and  economic  upheavals  in  Russia have fueled a sense that Finland's best hope for the  future  is  to reorient  its political economy toward  the West.  For many  Finns,  then, the vote  on EU membership  represented  an  important symbolic moment in the country's history.  The  impact  of  this  way  of  thinking  is evident in Figure 3. Other than Helsinki,  the Finnish  provinces  that  lie  the  farthest  above the regression line-Lappi, Mikkeli, and Kymi-all border  on Russia. Many in eastern Finland  apparently  feared  that  rejecting  E U membership would consign their country to a 'twilight zone' between East and West.

Beyond  the  geopolitical  realm, Finland's economic position  favored the  arguments being advanced by  the  'yes' campaign. Finland does  not  have  as  strong  an  export-oriented economy as neighboring Sweden, but Finland is  the  fourth  greatest  pulp  exporter  in  the world,  and  exports  of  iron  and  steel,  ships, clothing,  and  footwear  are  important  as  well (Solsten and Meditz  1990). Moreover, Finland has suffered through  a serious recession in recent  years,  with  unemployment  figures running  as  high  as  18%. Against  this  backdrop, EU membership  offered  the  prospect  of  an expanded export market  and  an improvement in the general economic picture. That prospect was  not  strong enough  to  allay  all  concerns about  membership,  but  a  comment  by  Finland's Foreign Minister prior to the  vote summed up the sentiments of many. He stated that  he was  'skeptical of  the  EU, but  willing to  sacrifice  most  of  Finland's  agriculture  in exchange for membership and the hope of better prospects for the country as a whole' (Nationen 1994~). A majority of  the Foreign Minister's fellow citizens apparently agreed.

## Sweden

By  most  conventional indicators  Sweden is in the best position to benefit economically from

EU membership. Sweden's economy is export oriented  and  the  country  has  much  to  gain from  expanding  its  trading  possibilities  with the rest  of  Europe  (Stalvant 1993). Moreover, Sweden has been in a deep recession in recent years that is unlikely to be overcome without an  expansion  of  external  trade.  Hence,  the macroeconomic picture  in  Sweden provided a significant impetus  to membership.  It was  arguably  strong  enough  to  blunt  some  of  the concerns about rural  change advanced by  the 'no' campaign.  Such  concerns  were  further blunted  by  the  very nature of  Sweden's economic  and  settlement  geography  (see  Mead 1981). Over the  centuries  Sweden's relatively flat,  traversable  terrain  has  facilitated the  development  of  efficient transportation  systems and  the  large-scale exploitation  of  resources. Easily accessible forest resources, for example, led to early mechanization of the timber industry, which in turn favored the development of large-scale operations. At the same time, Sweden's economic policies in recent decades have favored large-scale farming and a combination of  high technology and service  industries. Taken together, these developments have promoted comparatively  rapid urbanization in Sweden  and  a concomitant decline  in the country's  small-scale  farming  and  resourceextraction sectors.

Given  this  history, it is  not  surprising  that arguments  about  rural  change  and  hardships for  the  agricultural  sector  had  only  limited success in Sweden. As one Swedish farmer put it,  'the  EU  cannot  possible  do  any  greater harm  to  Swedish  agriculture  than  the  Social Democrats  already  have  done'  (Kvadsheim 1994, 6). With 80% of the population living in the  southern  third  of  Sweden  (Mannesland 1994), there  are  simply  not  enough  Swedes living in classic peripheral, resource-dependent communities  where arguments about rural change would be expected to hold sway. Even in the Swedish north, the sense of local particularism is blunted by a  comparatively  high level of  interregional  connectivity.  Since  the  rural economy has already been greatly transformed, the  debate  over  membership  focused  more heavily on macroeconomic considerations, and these favored the arguments being raised by the 'yes'  coalition.  Hence,  it  is  not  particularly surprising  that  the  majority  of  the  Swedish population voted in favor of EU membership.

## Norway

Norway's long, fragmented coastline and rough inland terrain historically made communication  difficult  and  resulted  in  a  relatively high  degree  of  interregional  differentiationboth  among regions in the periphery  and between  those  regions  and  the  capital  (John 1984).  The depth of Norwegian regionalism is reflected in  the  linguistic geography  of Norway,  which  is  more  diverse  than  that  of  any other Nordic country. Although transport and communications  developments  have  brought the  regions of  Norway  closer together  in  the modern era, regionalism remains strong. Moreover, many of the peripheral areas of the country are simply too remote and inaccessible to  have  succumbed  to  rapid  modernization. Consequently,  urbanization  proceeded  more slowly in Norway than in neighboring Sweden, and resource extraction  communities  were more  successful in  resisting  the  trend  toward mechanization and outside control (Halvorsen 1993).

Given these geographical circumstances, it is not  surprising  that  the  rural  change  issues highlighted  by  the  'no' campaign received  a more sympathetic hearing in Norway than  in Sweden or Finland.  Regionalism is  strong  in Norway,  and  many  felt  that  joining the  EU would amount to a surrender of local identities to  an  abstract  bureaucratic  entity.  The  'no' vote in Norway was  made  all  the  more likely by the absence of a strong economic argument in  favor  of  membership, particularly as  compared with  Sweden and Finland. Membership would probably have helped Norway's fish exports, but little else. Moreover, North  Sea oil has  buffered  Norway  to  a  degree  from  the serious  economic  problems  that  have  beset Sweden and  Finland  in  recent  years.  Hence, the  'yes' campaign  could  not  make  a  strong argument  about  the  importance  of  membership for resolving existing economic problems. That left them with  the argument  that failing to join the  EU  would  isolate  Norway in Europe.  Yet  that  argument  ran  up  against  a strong sense of commitment to the concept of Norwegian sovereignty-a legacy of  centuries of outside domination of  Norway that did not end completely until  1905. In the face of that commitment,  the  'yes' campaign  simply was unable to counteract the forces pushing toward a  'no' vote  among  the  majority  of  Norwegians.

## Mediating Factors at the Local Level

Beyond  national  differences  among  Finland, Sweden, and Norway, the remarkable continuity in  the internal  spatial character  of  the  EU membership vote across all three countries requires  explanation.  For  those  living  in  the more densely populated areas of Norway, Sweden,  and  Finland,  the  arguments  in  favor  of membership were apparently persuasive-persuasive enough  even to overcome projections that EU membership would have negative economic  consequences  for  the  larger  cities  of Finland,  Sweden,  and  Norway.  These  arguments  were  clearly less  effective in  the  rural periphery,  even when  combined with  projections  showing  the  rural  periphery  benefiting from  EU subsidies. The reasons behind  this outcome can be discerned from the preceding discussion.  The  urban areas  of  the  Nordic countries  are  dominated  by  those who  define their interests more in national terms and who therefore  were  more  easily  persuaded  by  the macroeconomic  and  political  influence  arguments  of  the  'yes'  campaign.  By contrast, those  living in  more  remote  rural  areas were more  likely to  be  swayed  by  the  prospect  of diminished local control and the restructuring of  the rural sector.

The negative reaction to EU membership in the  Nordic periphery  was  exacerbated  by  the relationship that currently exists between core and  periphery  in  Norway,  Sweden, and  Finland. The  psychological distance between those  in  the  capital  cities  of  the  European north and those in outlying areas is significant (John  1984). The extent  of  that  distance became  clear  during  the  campaign  over  EU membership.  It  manifested  itself  most  obviously in a general disuust of  statements emanating  from  Oslo,  Stockholm,  and  Helsinh about the benefits of EU membership. In particular, substate regionalism is associated with a  suspicion in  many  rural  areas  that  the  national  governments  of  Norway,  Sweden, and Finland would  use EU subsidies as  an excuse to  cut  state  subsidies (Dug ug Tid 1994a). In Norway  such  suspicions were  heightened  by decades of north-south polarization that can be traced  back  to  the  efforts  of  the  Norwegian government to develop the country's industrial potential  after World  War I1 by discouraging northerners  who  had  been  brought  to  the south  during  the  Nazi  period  from  returning

home  (Mmnesland  1994). As  a  result,  when the  Agricultural Minister  failed  to  come  forward with any information on the level of subsidies  that  Norwegian  farmers would  receive after the five-year adjustment period that Norway would have gone through had it joined the EU, those in the periphery worried  about betrayal (Nytt Fra Norge 1994). Regional antipathies were sufficiently  strong that they affected how  economic  predictions  were  understood and interpreted. For many, such antipathies led to  a  rejection  of  the  economic  benefit  argument that was being advanced by advocates of EU membership in the urbanized core.

Beyond concerns about the amount of  economic benefits rural areas might receive, many voters  were  concerned  about  the  form  those benefits  might  take  if  Norway,  Sweden,  and Finland  joined  the  EU.  In the  Nordic  countries,  particularly  Norway,  the  goal  of  state regional  subsidies  in  recent  decades has  been to sustain a decentralized settlement pattern by creating  jobs  and  production  possibilities  in rural districts (Jussila and Malinen  1993). Regional funding is  used  to compensate  for the extra  cost  of  producing  goods and  services in these regions, and selective support to firms is therefore  not uncommon. To many, the prospect  of  substituting this  approach  to  regional assistance for the  EU approach-even if  total subsidies were greater-was unacceptable (Almk et al.  1994). As  they saw it, restructuring would bring social and psychological costs that would far outweigh any theoretical shortterm economic gain.

It should be clear from the foregoing, then, that local concerns played an important role in the  campaign for  E U  membership.  They are certainly evident in the positions of particular counties  and provinces  in  Figure  3.  For  Finland, the province lying farthest below the regression line is Vassa,  a western province that is  not strongly tied to the urban core but that is  distant  from Russia  and  therefore  less concerned with Russian influence than its counterparts  farther  east. In  the  case  of  Sweden, the counties lying the farthest below the regression line  are  Jamtland, Blekinge,  and  Goteborg. Jamtland is the county  with perhaps the strongest  sense  of  local  particularism  in  the Swedish  north-a consequence  of  close  historical  ties  with  adjacaent  parts  of  Norway. The other two counties are less distinct, but in each  case  the  inhabitants  expressed  concerns over the impact of EU membership  on sensitive  local industries. As  for Norway, the counties  that  lie  the  farthest  below  the  regression line are either well north of  Trondheim (Troms,  Nordland),  in  the  remote  area  between Bergen and Trondheim (Sogn og Fjordane,  Mme og  Romsdal), or  in  the  isolated southeast (Rogaland).  There is one Norwegian county well  below  the  regression  line  that  is more  urbanized-the county  of  Hordaland where  Bergen is located-but there  are longstanding  divisions  between  the  Bergen  area and the Norwegian core. Hordaland is thus in a very different  position  from  the Norwegian counties that lie the farthest above the regression line-Akershus, Buskerud, Oppland, and Hedmark-which are in a ring around Oslo.

## Implications and Conclusion

The vote on EU  membership in Norway, Sweden, and Finland revealed a significant degree of  polarization  between  the  populous  south and the rural north. To understand that polarization it is  important  to look beyond  the  expected financial impacts of EU  membership on different  regions.  The interpretation  of  such impacts is  mediated  by  other issues and  concerns, which themselves are rooted  in the historical  and  geographical contexts from  which they are viewed. The history and geography of states and local areas help to explain not only the reasons for a rejection of EU membership in  the  Nordic  periphery,  but  also  why  that rejection  was  forceful  enough  in  one  caseNorway-to overcome  the  economic  arguments that were being advanced in support of membership.

The  significance  of  analyzing  the  Nordic vote  on membership  goes beyond what it can tell us about political and social issues in Norway,  Sweden, and  Finland,  however. The regional and local issues that emerged during the campaign  and  that  played  such  a  significant role  in the vote are signals of wider issues the EU faces in the years ahead. Sweden and Finland are now part of the EU, but that does not erase the  fact that  a  substantial percentage  of their  populations  voted  against  membership. The Swedish Prime Minister  Ingvar Carlsson recognized this when, the night  after the  referendum,  he  expressed  sadness  that  'fortyseven percent of  the Swedish people had lost' (Dag o g Tid 1994b). Those  47%  still  live  in

Sweden, and there  is  no indication  that  they have  changed their  views.  Indeed,  opposition to EU membership seems to have grown. In a post-referendum  opinion  poll  conducted  in Sweden  between  January 10  and 14,  1995, 55% of the population claimed that they would vote against EU membership if  given another opportunity (Fyllinngsnes 1995).  There are indications that  opposition  to  EU membership has grown in Finland as well, and the majority of  Norwegians remain opposed to joining the EU (Nytt Fra Norge 1995). Embedded  in  the Nordic vote over EU membership, then,  is  a great  challenge  for  the  Union  in  the  years ahead. That challenge is to move the integration  process  forward in  a  way  that  does  not exacerbate the  interregional  tensions  that  are so vividly  displayed in  the map of  the Nordic vote. If that is to occur, it is imperative that the guiding  vision  for  the  EU  not  be  one  that posits  the  Union  as  a  centralized  superstate sitting astride the European continent. Instead, the EU must work to facilitate  cooperation and interaction in ways  that acknowledge regional differences and  that  respect  local  social  and cultural practices.

## Literature Cited

- Agnew, John A.  1990. From  political methodology to geographical social theory? A critical review of electoral geography, 1960-87.  In Developments in Electoral  Geography, ed.  R. J.  Johnston,  Fred  M. Shelley,  and  Peter J.  Taylor,  1-21.  London  and New York: Routledge.
- . 1996.  Mapping politics: How context counts in  electoral geography. Political  Geography 1 S(2): 129-46.
- AlmPs, R., K. Karlsen, E. P.  Strzte, and 0. Storstad Sund. 1994. Fakta om EU. Trondheim: Senter For Bygdeforskning.

Bergens  Tidene. 1994. EU-valget. November 30:8.

- Center for  European  Policy  Studies.  1994. The Fourtb Enlargement: Public Opinion on Membership in the Nordic Candidate Countries, Center for European Policy Studies Paper No.  56. Brussels: Center  for European Policy Studies.
- Dug og  Tid. 1994a. Svensk opprsr. February 1O:ll.
- . 1994b. Kvifor smilte ikkje Ingvar Carlsson? November 17:  1.
- Dagbladet. 1994. Slik bestemmer alderen EU vlaget. November 10:4.
- Dahle, Kjell.  1994. Stmre bredde i svensk EU-motstand. Nationen September 21:12.
- Finland.  Central  Statistical Office.  1985. Statirtical Yearbook o f Finland  1984. Helsinki: Central Statistical Office of  Finland.
- Fyllinngsnes,  Ottar. 1995.  Svenskane kjenner  seg lurte. Dug og  Tzd January 26:6.
- Halvorsen,  Knut.  1993. European  integration  and the effects on regional development  in Norway. In Visions and  Strategies  in  European  Integration, ed. Lars  Lundqvist  and  Lars  Olof  Person,  61-78. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
- Hansen, Trond.  1994. Norway and the EU: Divided opinion. Scandinavian Review 82 (2):13-17.
- Henriksen, Peter. 1992. Det Store Norges-Atlas. Oslo: Hjemmets Bokforlag.
- Huvfudrtadrbladet. 1994. Rostfordelning per valkrets. October  17:Y.
- Johansen, Harley.  1993. Rural development in Finland's communes. Research and Exploration 9 (4):400-02.
- John,  Brian S. 1984. Scandinavia: A  N m   Geography. New York: Longman.
- Johnston,  R. J.  1986. Places, campaigns, and votes. Political  Geography Quarter&amp; 5:S105-1?.
- Jussila, Heikki, and Pentti Malinen.  1993. Regional rural policy in northern Fenno-Scandia:  Searching for the northern periphery in an integrating European economy. Fennza 171 (1):45-61.
- Kvadsheim,  John.  1994.  Vind i seilene for nei-siden. Nationen October  5:6.
- Mead, William R. 1981. An Historical  Geography  of Scandinavia. London  and  New  York:  Academic Press.
- Molle, Willem.  1994. The Ecmomics o f European Integration:  Theory, Practice,  Policy. 2nd  ed.  Aldershot,  England: Dartmouth  Publishing Company Limited.
- Msnnesland, Jan.  1994. Regional Policy  in the Nordic Contries. Stockholm: NordREFO.
- Murphy,  Alexander  B. 1990. Electoral  geography and the ideology of  place: The making of regions in  Belgian  electoral  politics.  In Developments  in Electoral  Geography, ed.  R. J. Johnston,  Fred  M. Shelley, and Peter J. Taylor, 227-41. London and New York: Routledge.
- Nationen. 1994a.  Medlemskap vil koste 6,s milliarder Prlig. August 22:6.
- . 1994b. Si meg, statsminister . .  . . September  12:2.
- . 1994~. Finsk realisme. October  15:2.
- Nytt Fra Norge. 1994.  Jordbruket vil tape pi medlemskap. October 18:lO.
- . 1995.  Fortsatt flertall  mot EU. January 315. Pesonen, Pertti.  1994. Three Nordic  referenda on EU membership. Scandinavian Review 82 (3):4-11.
- Raza, Juris.  1994. Swedes vote to join the European
- Union. United Press International November 13.
- Skjorstad, A. M. 1994.  Valkomme efter, Norge. Bergens  Tidene November  14:7.

- Ssgaard,  Henning  AndrC.  1994.  &lt;&lt;Grasrota&gt;&gt; har talt. Morgenbladet December 2:6.
- Solsten,  Eric,  and  Sandra  W.  Meditz,  eds.  1990. Finland:  A  Country  Study. 2nd  ed.  Washington, DC: Federal  Research  Division, Library of  Congress.
- Stalvant, Carl-Einar.  1993. Sweden,  Baltic  Co-operation and  Regional Europe. Stockholm: Swedish Institute.
- Str0m, Kaare.  1992. Norway, Sweden, and the new Europe. Scandinavian  Studies 64:498-52 3.
- Sutela, Pekka.  1994. Should Finland join the European Union? Scandinavian  Review 82: 14-18.
- Syverud, Gunnar.  1994. Hard  kamp mot overmakten. Nationen October  15:lO.
- Wallace, Helen, ed. 1992. The Wider Western Europe: Reshaping the EUEFTA Relationship. London  and New York: Pinter  Publishers for the Royal Institute  of  International Affairs, London.
- Waller, Allan.  1994 The impact of European single market. In European Logistics: The View From Scan-
- dinavia, Conference Board Report  No.  1096-94CR, 9-1  1. New York: Conference Board, Inc.
- Wastenson,  L.,  ed.  1992. National Atlas o f Sweden. Vol. I : The Infrastructure. Stockholm:  SNA Publishing.
- Westengen, Kari. 1994. Finland forbereder medlemsskap. Nationen October 18:12.

ALEXANDER B.  MURPHY (Ph.D., University of Chicago) is Professor in the Department of Geography  at  the  University  of  Oregon,  Eugene,  OR 97403. His research interests focus on the political, cultural, and economic geography of Europe.

ANNE HUNDERI-ELY recently received a master's degree in geography at the University  of Oregon. She is now living and working in Bergen, Norway.