## Environmental Discourses and the Ivorian Savanna 1

Thomas J. Bassett*  and Koli Bi Zuéli**

* Department of Geography, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign

- ** Institut de Géographie Tropicale, Université de Cocody, Abidjan

The African continent is portrayed in development texts as experiencing environmental crises of staggering proportions. Despite a lack of reliable data, the World Bank considers environmental degradation to be so widespread that the 'business' of environmental planning and regulation is now seen as a global affair. It currently requires low-income countries receiving its financial assistance to develop National Environmental Action Plans (NEAPs) which, in assembly-line fashion, are being produced according to a blueprint. Taking the West African case study of Côte d'Ivoire, this paper argues that the planning process, specifically the identification of environmental problems, is based on a poor understanding of the nature and direction of environmental change. We confront this data problem by contrasting the image of a deforested savanna landscape found in the Côte d'Ivoire NEAP with the more wooded landscape experienced by farmers and herders and confirmed by our analysis of aerial photographs. Our second objective is to address the policy implications of two geographical issues rising from this paper: the disjointed scale problem between local/regional environmental-change patterns and global environmental discourses, and the human-environmental consequences of ignoring actual versus imagined environmental problems. A third goal is to contribute to the growing convergence in cultural and political ecology around the use of multiple research methods to explain environmental-change dynamics. Our discussion of environmental change is informed by intensive data collection in two rural communities in the Korhogo region of northern Côte d'Ivoire. Research methods included focus-group discussions and household surveys to record local perceptions of environmental change. Aerial photo analysis, GIS mapping, and vegetation transects were used to interpret land-cover changes. Finally, interviews with individuals involved in the NEAP process in the Côte d'Ivoire government, World Bank, and NGOs illuminated the received ideas and institutional interests of various players in environmental planning. Key Words: African savannas, cultural and political ecology, environmental discourses, national environmental action plans, World Bank.

As much as half of SSA's (Sub-Saharan Africa) farmland is affected by soil degradation and erosion, and up to 80% of its pasture and range areas show signs of degradation (Cleaver and Schreiber 1994: 3-4).

Although  soil  degradation,  notably  accelerated soil erosion, is unquestionably the result of expansion of farming into fragile areas [ zones sensibles ], little data exist to confirm this fact (World Bank 1994: 8).

Humanity cannot stand by and let a whole continent disintegrate . . . The trees, earth, soil, water, wildlife,  the  urban  environment-those  are  everyone's business (Falloux and Talbot 1993: xiiixiv).

he image of an entire continent physically  disintegrating  due  to  the  destructive land-use practices of its inhabitants conveys the magnitude of Africa's environmental problems-at least in the eyes of the World Bank.  Yet  there  remains  considerable  uncertainty about the very processes generating this assumed  degradation  of  the  environment.  As the Bank notes for Côte d'Ivoire in the second epigraph, 'little data exist to confirm this fact.' This  is  also  the  case  for  other  parts  of  Africa (Watts 1987; Stocking 1987, 1996). Despite a lack of reliable evidence, the World Bank considers environmental degradation to be so widespread,  that  'the  business'  of  environmental planning and regulation is now seen as a global T

affair, and one that falls within its own purview (Falloux  and  Talbot  1993:  xiii-xiv).  Indeed, since the late 1980s, the Bank has required lowincome  countries  that  receive  International Development  Association  (IDA)  funding  to draw  up  national  environmental-action  plans (NEAPs). 1

As demonstrated in World Bank policy papers and country reports, the link between environmental  planning  and  development  assistance  is  articulated  within  the  discourse  of sustainable development (Williams 1995). The fuzzy green notion of sustainable development is readily adopted by the Bank because of its compatibility with its basic 'technocratic, managerial, capitalistic, and modernist ideology' (Adams 1995: 93). Under the banner of sustainable development, the Bank now promotes a 'winwin'  strategy  of  combining  economic  growth with environmental conservation (World Bank 1992: 2-3; Biot et al. 1995). Never considering that  its  past  policies  and  interventions  are  in any  way  implicated  in  the  so-called  environmental  crisis,  the  Bank  presents  itself  as  an impartial observer and promoter of good stewardship. It is currently assisting dozens of African governments to develop NEAPs which, in assembly-line  fashion,  are  being  produced  according  to  a  blueprint  (Greve  et  al.  1995). NEAPS are heralded as  modern  vehicles  that will lead its member countries down the road to rational and orderly sustainable development.

In this paper, we examine the contents of the NEAP for Côte d'Ivoire with special attention given to how environmental problems are constructed for the northern savanna region. Our objectives are threefold. The first is to highlight the problem of data gaps in the environmentalplanning and sustainable-development discourses. Determining if an environmental problem exists would appear to be a critical first step in the planning process. Yet what is striking about the NEAP  process  is  how  quickly  environmental problems  are  identified  and  prioritized  on  the basis  of  so  little  data.  We  confront  this  data problem by contrasting the image of a highly degraded  savanna  environment  found  in  Côte d'Ivoire  NEAP  reports  with  the  actual  landscape as experienced by farmers and herders and confirmed by our analysis of aerial photographs and land-cover changes.

Our second objective is  to  address  some  of the policy implications related to the disjuncture between local and regional patterns of environ- mental change and national and global environmental discourses. One result of this disjointed scale problem is that the actual dynamics of environmental change are being overlooked. We consider,  in  turn,  the  ecological  and  human consequences  of  ignoring  ongoing  biophysical changes  while  planners  are  busy  addressing imaginary environmental problems.

A third goal is to contribute to the growing convergence in cultural and political ecology on the need to consider multiple views and employ multiple research methods in assessing and explaining environmental change (Blaikie 1994, 1995; Batterbury et al. 1997). One of the challenges of doing cultural and political ecology is demonstrating the linkages between a variety of social  and  biophysical  processes  driving  environmental  change.  As  Blaikie  has  suggested, there is a 'plurality of knowledges' on the environment  and  a  host  of  epistemological  and methodological issues that need to be addressed in combining natural and social scientific perspectives (Blaikie 1995: 204). Notwithstanding these formidable challenges, an ecologically invigorated political ecology is emerging that systematically  integrates  sociocultural  and  biophysical processes. Karl Zimmerer's study of the geography  of  cultivars  in  the  Peruvian  Andes and Matthew Turner's research on the species composition and grazing patterns of livestock in the West African Sahel successfully join social science  and  natural  science  perspectives  to enhance our understanding of biodiversity and rangeland degradation, respectively (Zimmerer 1996; Turner 1993, 1999). The emphasis placed in cultural and political ecological research on local knowledge, environmental history, multiscale politics, and socially differentiated resourcemanagement practices, requires  intensive  field study and multiple research methodologies. This paper presents a methodological route to scholars  interested in traversing the social and biophysical realms of human geography.

## Environmental Narratives and

## Regional Discursive Formations

The theoretical footing of this paper is set in a  body  of  cultural  and  political  ecological  research that has coalesced around a set of ideas drawn from discourse theory, critical histories of science,  and  the  sociology  of  development. Three recent volumes, all edited by geographers,

have contributed to the study of human-environment relations with their focus on environmental narratives, development discourses, and regional  discursive  formations  (Crush  1995a; Leach and Mearns 1996; Peet and Watts 1996). Melissa  Leach  and  Robin  Mearns's  interest  in environmental  policy  draws  them  to  consider how  African  environmental  issues  are  framed and the practical implications of received ideas on policy. Their findings suggest that many environmental-crisis stories are either exaggerated or simply mistaken. The fundamental question they  pose  is  why,  in  the  face  of  contradictory evidence and new ecological theories, environmental orthodoxies such as desertification persist (Swift 1996; Warren 1996). Their examination of the structural, institutional, and scientific origins of various narratives (e.g., the tragedy of the commons) leads to the conclusion that such stories are ineluctably cultural constructs. 2  They argue that the persistence of received ideas on the  African  environment  can  in  part  be  explained by their 'practical effects' in serving the interests of individuals and institutions making up  the  development  apparatus  (Leach  and Mearns  1996:  19).  For  example,  the  common idea  that  African  land  users  are  recklessly  destroying the land, due to unregulated land access, has been used by a variety of actors in the past and present to intervene in rural land-rights systems (Bassett 1993a, 1995). The notion that land privatization will give land users the necessary security to invest in land improvements is commonly used by government agencies to extend  their  control  over  rural  peoples  and  resources  (Anderson  and  Grove  1987;  Ferguson 1990; Roe 1991). We argue below that the dominant  environmental  narrative  for  the  Côte d'Ivoire savanna is misconceived. In contrast to the  view  that  wooded  savannas  are  becoming desertified, characterized by a progressive loss of trees and an expansion of grasslands, we argue that  the  landscape  is  becoming  more  wooded. To  explain  the  presence  of  the  desertification narrative  in  the  Côte  d'Ivoire  National  Environmental  Action  Plan,  we  locate  it  within what Watts and Peet call a 'regional discursive formation' in which the idea of desertification is integral to the discursive environmental history of the region (Peet and Watts 1996: 16).

Geographical images and environmental narratives  are  commonly  used  as  framing  devices by developers to set the scene for their subsequent interventions (Mitchell 1995). In this sense,  they  form  part  of  the  larger  conceptual framework of development discourse. Jonathan Crush  defines  the  focus  of  development  discourse analysis as

the  ways  that  development  is  written,  narrated and spoken, on the vocabularies deployed in development texts to construct the world as an unruly terrain requiring management and intervention;  on  their  stylized  and  repetitive  form  and content,  their  spatial  imagery  and  symbolism, their use (and abuse) of history, their modes of establishing  expertise  and  authority  and  silencing alternative voices; on the forms of knowledge that development produces and assumes; and on the power  relations  it  underwrites  and  reproduces (Crush 1995b: 3).

Images of chaos and environmental devastation run  through  the  Côte  d'Ivoire  National  Environmental Action Plan (NEAP-CI). Land-use practices are described as anarchic, as peasants and  pastoralists  are  purportedly  destroying  savanna  woodlands  through agricultural land clearing,  burning,  and  overgrazing.  The  plan proposes new laws and land-use regulations as a means  of  controlling  what  is  uncritically  described as a crisis situation. As a type of green conditionality  that  is  imposed  on  poor  Third World  countries  seeking  assistance  from  the World Bank, NEAPs are inextricably linked to the  development  industry  and  networks  of power (Escobar 1995; Rich 1994). The NEAP's focus on regulation, better planning, and rational land use are defining features of what Adams associates with mainstream sustainable development discourse (Adams 1995). It is at heart reformist and technocentrist: 'there are no ideological  conflicts  with  the  dominant  capitalist industrial development model . . . only debates about  methods  and  priorities'  (Adams  1995: 90).

The history of the idea of desertification in West Africa and its centrality to national and global environmentalist discourses is linked to what Peet and Watts theorize as a 'regional discursive formation' (1996: 15-16). By this they refer to:

certain modes of thought, logics, themes, styles of expression,  and  typical  metaphors  [which]  run through the discursive history of a region, appearing in a variety of forms, disappearing occasionally, only to reappear with even greater intensity in new guises.

The  image  of  desert-like  conditions  spreading into the savanna and tropical forest zones as a result of destructive land-use practices of Africans dates from the early twentieth century in West  Africa  (Mortimore  1989:  12-18).  The French  colonial  forester  Auguste  Aubréville, who coined the term 'desertification,' described the process as taking place on two fronts. The first  was  occurring  in  the  tropical  forest  area, which was undergoing a process of 'savannization' as farmers cleared forests for farming, and purportedly uncontrolled burning  prevented tree  seedlings  from  reestablishing  themselves. The second front, he argued, was advancing in the semiarid and humid savannas, where open deciduous  forests  [ forêt  claire ]  had  become  degraded wooded savannas [ savane boisée ] as a result of shifting cultivation and bush fires.

Leach and Fairhead argue that Aubréville's views formed part of a 'pan-West African forest orthodoxy,' in which British and French foresters shared a common set of ideas on African forest  history  and  environmental  change  that linked deforestation with desiccation (Fairhead and  Leach  1998).  Elements  of  this  orthodoxy included the notion that forests positively affected climate, especially rainfall levels (Aubréville 1938); that the 'native customs' of 'improvident'  farmers  who,  with  fire  and  axes, were, limb by limb, destroying the forest, needed to  be  regulated  (Stamp  1940:  300;  Stebbing 1935: 523); that it was the duty of colonial foresters and administrators to protect the remaining tracts and vestiges of forests by creating classified forests and better policing; and that more forestry  personnel  were  needed  to  undertake these various tasks (Aubréville 1938: 175-89).

In an alternative reading of landscape history in West Africa, Fairhead and Leach (1995) argue that forest cover has increased in precisely those areas where devastation was considered to be greatest. Specifically, they show that forest islands  in  the  forest-savanna  transition  zone  of Guinea are not relicts of a formerly more extensive rain forest. To the contrary, they argue that these islands have expanded around human settlements  over  the  past  two  centuries  under changing political, economic, and social conditions. Their study is most compelling in its explanation  of  forest  gain  in  and  around  settlement areas. It is less persuasive in its analysis of vegetation  change  in  agricultural  and  pastoral zones. This is especially true in their discussion of the role of livestock raising on savanna vege- tation,  particularly  pastoralists'  use  of  fire  as  a land-management tool. Fires set by Fulbe pastoralists are generally described as oriented toward 'pasture maintenance.' That is, burning favors grasses  while  fire  suppression  encourages  trees (Fairhead and Leach 1996: 230-33). Our case study  shows  that  we  need  to  go  beyond  these general  categories  of  'burning'  and  'fire  suppression' to examine the effects of different fi re regimes on  grass-tree  dynamics.  Fire  does  not have to be totally suppressed for trees and shrubs to  invade  savannas.  For  example,  a  change  in the timing of fire can strongly influence the proportion  of  woody  to  herbaceous  species.  We show  that  Fulbe  pastoralists  in  Côte  d'Ivoire commonly set fire to the bush in the early dry season  to  encourage  pasture  regrowth.  One  of the outcomes of this practice is tree and bush encroachment.

In  summary,  this  study  complements  Fairhead and Leach's analysis of vegetation change in the forest-savanna transition zone by extending it to the northern savanna area where we focus on the impact of agricultural expansion and livestock  raising  on  savanna  vegetation.  More important,  our  analysis  reveals  that  while  the Ivorian  savanna  is  not  undergoing  desertification, the vegetation cover does show signs of significant rangeland degradation. In the conclusion, we consider the implications of the Ivorian NEAP's failure to recognize this problem for the future of livestock development.

## Research Area and Methods

This study is the product of a collaborative research project conducted by an interdisciplinary group of scholars at the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign and the Tropical Geography  Institute  (IGT)  at  the  University  of Cocody, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.  The  research focused on the patterns and processes of environmental and social change in two highly contrasting  rural  communities  in  northern  Côte d'Ivoire  (Department  of  Korhogo).  Katiali,  a village of some 1900 inhabitants, is situated 60 km northwest of Korhogo in the subprefecture of  Niofouin.  Population  densities  in  this  area average 16 persons/km 2 . Tagbanga, with a population of approximately 200 persons, is located 17 km south of Korhogo in the subprefecture of Tioroniaradougou. It is situated in the so-called 'densely settled zone' of Korhogo where popula-

tion densities range between 80 to 120 persons/ km 2  in the inner areas and between 40 to 80 in the outer areas. According to the most recent census  (1988),  the  population  density  of  the subprefect of Tioroniaradougou was 73 persons/ km 2 -more than four and a half times the level of Katiali.

Figure  1  situates  the  two  study  areas.  The land area framed by the broken-lined boxes was subject  to  aerial-photo  interpretation  (see  below). Regional rainfall averages between 1000 and  1200  mm,  with  most  precipitation  occurring  during  the  rainy-season  months  of  June through  October.  Soils  and  vegetation  types vary with topography and land use (Figure 2).

We collected information on land-cover and land-use patterns using a variety of field research and analytical techniques. Survey-research methods  were  used  to  administer  a  questionnaire on environmental perceptions to a sample of 38 Senufo and Jula households in Katiali and to 42 Senufo households in the Tagbanga region. Group interviews were also held with Fulbe pastoralists  in  the  Katiali  area.  To  assess  whether local perceptions of environmental change were congruent with scientific findings, we reviewed the specialist literature on human-induced modifications of savanna vegetation. We then examined aerial photographs located in Côte d'Ivoire and France for different time periods to compare land  use/cover  patterns  for  the  two  research sites.  Geographic  information  systems  (GIS) techniques were utilized to quantify land-cover trends. To gain a clearer understanding of vegetation change dynamics on the ground, we inventoried  species  along  50-m  transects  and  in 10 × 10-meter  plots  following  the  contactpoint method adapted from Daget and Poissonnet  (1971)  by  César  and  Zoumana  (1995). 3 Finally, we collected environmental policy and planning documents and interviewed individuals  involved  in  the  NEAP  process  in  government  ministries  and  at  the  World  Bank's  regional headquarters in Abidjan.

## Farming and Herding in Katiali and Tagbanga

Rapid changes have occurred in the farming and livestock-raising systems of northern Côte d'Ivoire since the mid-1950s. The case of Katiali is indicative of general trends in the less densely settled areas of the Korhogo region. These include the expansion of cotton from 1 percent of the cultivated area in the early 1960s to 45 percent  by  the  late  1980s.  Over  the  same  time period, there has been a near doubling in the average area cultivated by households. This transformation  of  agricultural  production  has  been facilitated by the introduction of ox-plows into the area. The percentage of Katiali households possessing oxen rose from 37 percent in 1982 to 92 percent in 1992. This expansion of ox-plows has allowed households to increase the area under  cultivation  from  an  average  of  4.75  ha  to 8.20 ha. Despite the dominance of cotton in the farming system, peasant farmers continue to cultivate a wide range of food crops.

Farming systems of the Tagbanga region have not  evolved  as  rapidly.  Just  43  percent  of  the households  owned  oxen  in  1995.  Households using ox-plows cultivated an average area of 4.2 hectares. Households not owning ox plows cultivated  less  than  2  ha  (1.9  ha).  Farming  was dominated by cotton, which covered more than half of the crop area.

Katiali's population grew at a low annual rate of 0.7 percent between 1955 and 1984. High infant mortality rates and the emigration of young men and women account for  this  low  growth rate. 4  Low population densities permit farmers to practice a long-fallow agricultural system. Typically,  fields  are  cultivated  5-6  years  and  then put into a 10-30 year fallow. The situation of land abundance and good pastures in the Katiali area has been a magnet to Fulbe pastoralists who have steadily immigrated into the region since the early 1970s (Bassett 1986). Population growth rates correspondingly increased at an annual rate of 2 percent between the 1975 and 1988 census. 5

In the densely settled zone of Korhogo, short fallow periods and high rates of emigration are characteristic.  A  survey  conducted  in  1997  in two  communities  of  the  Tagbanga  region  revealed that between a quarter and a half of the population  were  absent. 6   More  than  half  had migrated to urban areas while 46 percent emigrated  to  other  rural  areas  in  search  of  arable land. 7   Not surprisingly, high population densities and limited resources to improve soil fertility have resulted in shorter fallow periods in the Tagbanga area in comparison to Katiali. In Tagbanga, 87 percent of the land under cultivation in 1996 had been in fallow for just five years or less. Livestock play an important role in altering the vegetation cover in both regions.

Parallel to and in many ways associated with the transformation of farming systems, livestock

Figure 1. Location of case study areas: Katiali and Tagbanga, Côte d'Ivoire.

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Vegetation cover in relationship to soil and slope characteristics in the Katiali region, Côte d'Ivoire.

<!-- image -->

raising  has  expanded  considerably  since  the early  1960s.  In  1962,  there  were  an  estimated 115,000  head  of  cattle  owned  by  Senufo  and Jula  farmers  in  the  Korhogo  region  (SEDES 1965: 200). Cattle owned by transhumant Fulbe pastoralists who had recently immigrated from the  neighboring  countries  of  Mali  and  Upper Volta (Burkina Faso) numbered no more than 8000  (Bassett  1986).  Thirty  years  later,  there were  nearly  a  million  head  of  cattle  concentrated in the northern savanna region. Peasantowned cattle increased four-fold over this period (1962-1991), while Fulbe cattle grew by a factor of  52  (Figure  3).  The  number  of  oxen  in  the north rose from 252 head in 1971 to 68,416 in 1991  (CIDT  1993:  46). 8   Albert  Kientz  estimated the annual growth rate of the combined sedentary and transhumant cattle population to be 6.51 percent between 1968 and 1989 (Kientz 1991: 23). Fulbe transhumant cattle grew at a faster  rate  (9.1  percent)  than  peasant-owned sedentary cattle (5.21 percent).

This expansion in livestock raising is truly remarkable because it is occurring well within an area where animal diseases have limited cattle

Figure  3. Fulbe  cattle  population  growth,  19731993

<!-- image -->

keeping in the past to the relatively small but hardy Bos taurus breeds (N'dama, Baoulé). The most  deadly  disease  by  far  is  animal  sleeping sickness or trypanosimiasis, transmitted by the tse-tse fly. Zebu cattle are particularly sensitive to this disease. How can we explain the massive movement  of  zebu  cattle  into  this  diseaseinfested area? During the 1970s and early 1980s, the most common techniques used to maintain animal health were herd mobility, the use of veterinary  drugs,  and  the  concentration  of  herds within farming areas where tse-tse fly habitats and hosts had been significantly reduced through land clearing and hunting (Bassett 1986). In addition  to  these  measures,  a  tse-tse  fly  control program was launched with German technical assistance in the late 1970s, which has led to a dramatic reduction in flies, especially the riverine species Glossina palpalpis gambiensis and G. tachinoides. Both Senufo hunters and Fulbe pastoralists in the Katiali area remarked on the dramatic drop in tse-tse flies between the Badenou and Bandama Rivers where conical-shaped and insecticide-treated fly traps have been placed for more than a decade. 9

The earliest livestock census data for Katiali dates from 1982, when there were 3310 Fulbe cattle in the area. By 1992, their numbers more than doubled (to 7033). Over the same period, peasant-owned  cattle  rose  from  578  to  1,417 head.  Oxen  ownership  also  dramatically  increased, rising from 4 to 381 between 1975 and 1992.  In  summary,  by  the  early  1990s,  there were close to 9,000 head of cattle grazing in the Katiali region. Eighty percent of the cattle were Fulbe-owned.

The data on cattle numbers in the Tagbanga area are not as detailed as those for Katiali. They are aggregated with livestock census data for the subprefecture of Tioroniaradougou and the southern Korhogo region, which together com-

Table 1. Cattle Populations and Densities for Korhogo II and Niofouin, 1985 and 1990

|                        |   Korhogo II |   Korhogo II |   Niofouin |   Niofouin |
|------------------------|--------------|--------------|------------|------------|
| Cattle/Zone            |         1985 |         1990 |       1985 |       1990 |
| Sedentary              |       22,318 |       24,380 |     13,315 |     18,484 |
| Transhumant            |       12,977 |        2,081 |     11,939 |     55,618 |
| Total                  |       35,295 |       26,461 |     25,254 |     74,102 |
| Cattle density (km 2 ) |           21 |           16 |         15 |         45 |

Source: Kientz 1991.

prise the 'Korhogo II' pastoral zone. 10  When we compare these data with those for the Niofouin pastoral zone in which Katiali is located, a number of interesting points emerge (Table 1). 11  In the first half of the 1980s, cattle densities were higher in the more densely settled Korhogo II zone. By the end of the decade, however, cattle densities  declined  in  the  Korhogo  II  area  and sharply increased in the Niofouin region. Shifts in the geographical distribution of transhumant cattle accounted for most of these changes. The departure  of  Fulbe  herds  from  the  Korhogo  II area  was  linked  to  conflicts  between  Senufo farmers  and  Fulbe  herders  over  the  recurring problem of crop damage (Bassett 1988, 1994). A particularly violent conflict erupted in the dry season  of  1986,  which  resulted  in  the  sudden flight of tens of thousands of animals to the Côte d'Ivoire-Mali frontier.

In summary, the number of grazing animals increased dramatically in northern Côte d'Ivoire over  the  course  of  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Increases are evident in all three categories of livestock raising: transhumant, sedentary, and oxen. The most important contribution  to  livestock numbers is linked to the steady stream of Fulbe pastoralists from neighboring Mali and Burkina Faso. Peasant-herder conflicts over uncompensated crop damage resulted in periodic shifts in the  distribution  of  Fulbe  herds  in  the  region. The important point for this paper is that grazing pressure has significantly increased in the region as a result of the expansion of cattle. Some of the consequences of this pressure on savanna vegetation are examined in the following sections. In the next section, we contrast the discourse on environmental change as articulated in the Côte d'Ivoire NEAP with the statements given by peasant farmers and herders in a survey focused on environmental perceptions.

## Discourses on Environmental Change

Before examining the contents of the Ivorian NEAP, it is useful to provide some information on its origins.

## The NEAP Process

According  to  the  World  Bank,  the  NEAP process involves four stages: the identification of environmental  problems  and  their  underlying causes; setting priorities; establishing goals and objectives; and proposing new policies, institutional  and  legal  reforms,  and  priority  actions. The Bank considers this process to be straightforward.  'It  is  relatively  easy  to  identify  problems  and  formulate  appropriate  responses  to them' (Greve et al. 1995: 8-16). The more difficult phase, it argues, centers around the implementation of reforms and other policy actions.

The elaboration of a National Environmental Action Plan for Côte d'Ivoire began on the eve  of  the  U.N.-sponsored  conference  on  the environment and development held in Rio de Janeiro,  June  3-4,  1992.  The  Ministry  of  the Environment and Tourism organized a national conference (May 19-21, 1992) during which a rationale for a NEAP was presented. The World Bank worked closely with and helped to train the staff  members who organized this meeting and who subsequently carried out the first 'civilian  phase'  in  the  preparation  of  the  NEAP (World  Bank  1994:  4).  This  stage  involved holding regional meetings at which local civic and political leaders, government officials, and selected  farmers  and  herders  were  invited  to present their views on regional environmental issues. This form of 'participatory planning' did not  involve  consultations  with  ordinary  men and women living in rural areas about what they considered to be the most important environmental issues. At the Korhogo regional meeting, a small number of peasants were invited to participate in a setting that was dominated by civil servants  representing  the  agricultural  services, planning, and rural development. If 'participation' means 'the ability of people to share, influence,  or  control  design,  decision-making,  and authority in development projects and programs which affect  their  lives  and  resources'  (Peters 1996:  22),  then  this  so-called  civilian  phase of the Ivorian NEAP process involved very lim-

ited participation. As the Korhogo region NEAP  report  reveals  (see  below),  the  voices that were heard and the stories that were ultimately  accepted  suggests  that  'participatory' planning in the NEAP process is more rhetoric than reality.

A second national conference took place on November 28-30, 1994, where the NEAP coordinating committee presented its White Paper on the Environment that summarized the results of these regional meetings (RCI 1994a). This document became the basis of the Côte d'Ivoire National  Environmental  Action  Plan  whose  appearance in June 1995 capped the second phase of the NEAP process. At the same meeting, the World Bank presented its own report on Ivorian environmental problems and policy recommendations, Côte d'Ivoire: Towards Sustainable Development , which it later revised and distributed in December 1994 (World Bank 1994). A comparison of the outlines and content of the two reports suggests that both the Bank and NEAP coordinating committee worked closely together. The Ivorian government approved the NEAP in 1996, thus bringing the formal planning phases to completion. The execution of the plan, however, quickly ran aground when the Ministry of Housing  and  the  Environment  established  its own environmental agency to coordinate environmental projects estimated to cost $112 million. Aid donors, led by the World Bank, were critical of the structure of the agency, especially the lack of inter-Ministry coordination and the exclusion  of  NGOs  from  its  operations.  They also expressed serious concerns about the competence  of  the  individuals  appointed  by  the Minister  to  head  the  agency  (World  Bank 1998). The NEAP proposed the establishment of a  National  Environmental  Agency  that would be placed under the control of a Management  Council,  comprising  twelve  representatives  from  government and the private sector, including  a  representative  of  Ivorian  NGOs. The NEAP process also envisioned the creation of regional commissions and departmental committees in which different social groups would participate  in  various  environmental  planning activities. In contrast to this partially decentralized  planning  apparatus,  the  Minister  of  the Environment 'viewed environmental planning as a business and could only see millions of dollars  falling  from  the  sky,'  according  to  a  wellplaced member of the World Bank (World Bank 1998).

## Discourse 1: The NEAP Report

What image of environmental change in the savanna emerged from this NEAP process? The most detailed picture is contained in the report summarizing  the  findings  of  the  northern  regional meeting held in Korhogo and published in March 1994. The Korhogo report presents a grim  scene  of  environmental  degradation  in which peasants and pastoralists are blamed for the deforestation of wooded savannas. According to the report's authors, 'vegetative cover is declining due to the practice of shifting cultivation, bush fires, and the anarchic exploitation of forests and overgrazing' (RCI 1994b: 14). This change in plant cover is specifically characterized  by  'a  replacement  of  the  tree  savanna  by the grass savanna.' The report goes on to paint a portentous picture of this process:

More generally, the progressive widening towards the south of (grassy) plant formations has climatic repercussions (temperature, rainfall . . . ) which in turn affects vegetation cycles. To compensate for the  corresponding  lowering  of  productivity,  the one recourse has been to use chemical fertilizers which  engenders  certain  problems  such  as  soil acidification,  and  the  contamination  of  surface and subsurface waters (RCI 1994b: 14).

This image of a southerly advancing boundary of a vegetation type associated with more arid climates is similar to the 'marching desert' view found in the desertification literature. That is, in the absence of field studies, it is  assumed that the forms of environmental transformation purportedly taking place in the Sahel are also occurring in humid savannas. Bush fires and indigenous  land-rights  systems  are  signaled  out  as major  forces  in  this  assumed  environmental devastation:

We are increasingly witnessing a decline in vegetation cover, essentially due to bush fires used in an intensive and excessive manner leading to the disappearance  of  certain  varieties  .  .  .  these  assaults on the environment are essentially linked to the abuses of customary rights, the exaggerated interpretation  of  the  declarations  of  [the  former] President Félix Houphouet-Boigny such as: ' Land belongs to the person who improves it ' and ' that which has been planted by the hand of man must not be destroyed,  no  matter  where ;'  and  especially  the  absence of a rural land code (RCI 1994b: 12).

According  to  this  analysis,  and  that  of  the World Bank (Cleaver and Schreiber 1994: 8-

10), 'traditional' land-rights systems are inadequate  for  the  task  of  modern  environmental planning. They may have worked in the past, but contemporary land conflicts and insecurity have prevented farmers from investing in land improvements that might increase agricultural output and conservation practices. The assumption is that only when customary rights give way to  modern  (i.e.,  freehold)  tenure  systems  will the incentive to conserve natural resources exist. Indeed, the transformation of land-holding systems to freehold arrangements is considered in the Ivorian NEAP to be an important step towards  addressing  all  sorts  of  environmental problems. Figure 4 illustrates this modernization model of tenure change, environmental conservation, and agricultural growth, which informs the Ivorian NEAP and which is at the heart of World Bank rural-development policies in Africa. The model points to the extent to which environmental crises are integral to neoliberal development  discourses.  These  policies  only have  meaning  with  reference  to  agricultural stagnation and/or environmental decline. The desertification narrative serves such a need. This is  not  to  suggest  that  environmental  degradation  is  not  occurring  in  sub-Saharan  Africa. There is ample evidence of it (Batterbury and Bebbington 1998), whether it be soil erosion on the Borana plateau of southern Ethiopia (Coppock 1993), soil-fertility decline in southwestern  Burkina  Faso  (Gray  1997),  or  rangeland degradation  in  southern  Botswana  (Abel  and Blaikie 1989). Yet all of these examples are situated in local-level dynamics of resource access, control, and management. They emphasize, as do the case studies of environmental conservation in the Kano Close-Settled Zone of northern Nigeria (Mortimore 1998) and in Machakos District, Kenya (Tiffen et al. 1994), the importance of approaching natural resource management at multiple and nested scales (both biophysical and social). In the policy arena, these examples  point  to  the  need  to  provide  'locationally  and  culturally  appropriate  technical and  economic  options'  to  different  groups  of land  users  and  the  necessity  of  moving  away from 'regulation and intrusive administration' (Mortimore  1998:  190-93).  In  contrast,  blueprint development and cookie-cutter planning models like NEAP tend to be highly regulatory and intrusive. The case of Côte d'Ivoire's NEAP is indicative.

With  reference  to  preserving  the  country's

Figure 4. The modernization model of tenure change,  environmental  conservation,  and  agricultural growth.

<!-- image -->

biodiversity, the Ivorian NEAP makes a number of  forestry  policy  recommendations.  These  include outlawing logging (l'exploitation forestière ) above  the  eighth  parallel,  intensifying  village tree planting, controlling bush fires, and creating a Forestry Police to enforce these new regulations (RCI 1996). The first recommendation is strikingly reminiscent of E. P . Stebbing's shelterbelt scheme, proposed more than sixty years ago  (Stebbing  1935).  The  link  between  bush fires  and  desertification  is  commonly  made  in Côte  d'Ivoire  newspapers.  An  editorial  in  the ruling  party's  newspaper 12   warned  that  dryseason  bush  fires  'each  year  contribute  to  the desert's  advance  in  our  country'  (Gooré  Bi 1999). A National Committee for Forest Protection and Bush Fire Control was organized in 1996  to  raise  public  awareness  about  the  assumed social and environmental costs of bush fires. 13   The  committee  organizes  a  national awareness day each year in which statements are made linking bush fires with desertification. A national arbor day is also held each year, during which public officials  and  billboards  urge  citizens to plant trees to stop the purportedly advancing desert (Figure 5).

The image of an increasingly degraded wooded savanna giving way to a grass savanna and, ultimately, desert-like conditions not only persists in the minds of environmental planners, journalists, and public officials but is also firmly implanted  in  the  perception  of  Ivorian  environmental nongovernmental organizations

Figure 5. 'To each his own tree.' Billboard promoting reforestation in the northern savanna region during 'The Year of the Ivorian Forest,' 1988, Korhogo, Côte d'Ivoire.

<!-- image -->

(ENGOs). For example, Côte d'Ivoire's leading ENGO, the Green Cross of Côte d'Ivoire, devoted a special issue of its monthly information magazine to bush fires and forests. In his editorial, Green Cross President Gomé Gnohité Hilaire  emphasized  the  importance  of  educating the citizens of Côte d'Ivoire about the urgency of protecting the nation's remaining forests. He exclaimed that the paucity of funds going to environmental  education  was  having  disastrous consequences:

We have forgotten that raising awareness, that environmental  education,  is  a  daily  and  unending task. We have continued more than ever to utilize the forest  as  the  green  gold  of  our  development without  concerning  ourselves  with  the  consequences.  Our  forest  ecosystem  has  continued  to degrade, forests are savannized. The savannas are desertified (Gomé Gnohité 1998: 4).

How accurate is this image of environmental change in the northern savanna of Côte d'Ivoire found in national environmental planning documents and in the pages of NGO publications?

Has the expansion of livestock raising and the area under cultivation led to an increase in grass savannas and a decline in tree cover? Is fire the great destructive force that environmental planners and NGOs believe it to be?

Research undertaken in subhumid savannas of  Cameroon  (Boutrais  1995:  355-76)  and Ethiopia (Coppock 1993) indicates that heavy grazing pressure and burning commonly result in savannas  becoming  more,  not  less,  wooded. That is, in contrast to arid and semiarid areas where heavy grazing pressure leads to a greater exposure of soils to erosive forces, humid savannas  show  an  inverse  tendency  towards  greater vegetative cover. Woody encroachment has the beneficial effects of protecting soils from erosion and improving soil structure and fertility (Coppock 1993: 55). Do these distinctive attributes of  humid  savannas  provide  the  basis  of  constructing an alternative environmental-change narrative? If so, what might its implications be for environmental policy? The examples of Katiali and Tagbanga will provide some answers to these questions.

## Discourse 2: Land-User Voices

Local perceptions on environmental change were elicited from farmers and herders though a combination  of  focus-group  discussions,  structured and unstructured interviews, walks through the bush, and interviews with selected elders on the  environmental  history  of  the  region.  We first interviewed a sample of 38 peasant households with whom one of us (TJB) has worked for more than fifteen years. Five questions were systematically posed to this sample.

1. When you go out into the bush today, is it the  same  or  different  in  comparison  to when you were young?
2. If it is different, what is the difference and how do you explain this change?
3. There are more cattle in the bush today than there were twenty years ago. What has been the impact of these animals on the bush?
4. Are  bush  fires  the  same  today  as  they were when you were younger, or are they different?
5. Is it more or less easy to find firewood today in contrast to when you were young, or has it remained the same?

We were surprised and intrigued by the responses given to the first question. A total of 68 percent of the respondents stated that the bush had become more wooded. Our informants repeatedly told us stories about how the landscape used to be more open in the past, that one could see for great distances, but how this was now impossible because there are so many trees. From our informants' descriptions of past landscapes, the savanna of the 1940s and 1950s was dominated by tree and open-shrub savannas characterized by tall grasses and scattered trees, a number  of  which  were  protected  because  of  their economic value (e.g., Parkia biglobosa , Vitellaria paradoxa ). One farmer's observations were representative: 'Today there are trees everywhere. The road to M'bengué is closed in on both sides; before you could see far into the distance' (Silue 1995).

When  asked  to  explain  the  origins  of  this more wooded landscape, more than two-thirds of  the  sample  linked  it  to  the  arrival  of  Fulbe herds in the region. Respondents associated the increasing number of cattle to a decline in grass cover  which  has  allowed  trees  to  expand  in numbers. The mechanisms most often alluded to explain the extension of trees were the dispersal of tree seeds in cattle manure and less intense bush fires. Apparent to some informants was cattle manure's role in favoring the growth of  trees  in  the  dense  thickets  growing  up  in former cattle corrals in the middle of the bush. Almost  a  quarter  (21  percent)  of  the  sample linked  changes  in  the  proportion  of  woody  to herbaceous species to less aggressive bush fires.

Responses to the third question regarding the impact of cattle on the bush echoed those to the second. More than half (56 percent) of the respondents declared there are more trees because there are more cattle. Some (10 percent) associated  Fulbe  cattle  with  the  appearance  of  new weeds in their fields like Commelina benghalensis and Euphorbia heterophylla. Another quarter noted  that  there  is  less  grass  with  which  to thatch houses due to grazing pressure and grass fires  set  by  pastoralists.  The  principal  grasses used for roof construction, Andropogon gayanus , Andropogon  schirensis ,  and Schizachyrium  sanguineum , are highly palatable to cattle (Hoffman 1985:  166).  These  tall,  lignified  grasses  are burned during the early dry season when animal nutrition is at a stress point (Boudet 1991: 15659). Farmers say that it takes considerably more time  and  effort  to  find  sufficient  thatch  grass these days (Figure 6). Another sign of the shortage of grass is the higher price being paid for a bundle of thatch. In 1995, a large bundle cost 600 FCFA. In 1998, a much smaller bundle cost 750 FCFA. 14

The  largest  consensus  came  in  response  to the question focused on the nature of bush fires. Ninety-two percent of households agreed that bush fires had changed, and most notably that they  were  occurring  earlier  in  the  dry  season, were more frequent, and were less violent. Most respondents attributed the less aggressive fires to Fulbe  cattle,  saying  that  their  animals  'have eaten up all the grasses.' Others noted that the presence  of  more  trees  and  the  expansion  in cropping  area  further  reduced  the  fuel  that would normally produce extremely hot fires. In the  past,  fires  were  set  later  in  the  dry  season (February-March) by hunters, to enhance their visibility  while stalking game. Today, pastoralists set fires as early as October as a range-management  tool,  to  obtain  pasture  regrowth. 15 Since grasses are not thoroughly desiccated at this time, they do not burn as hot as they would in the late dry season. The increase in area under  cultivation  has  also  resulted  in  larger  fire

Figure 6. Dinaba Silue cutting and collecting grasses ( Andropogon spp. and Schizachyrium sanguineum ) to thatch the roof of his home, Katiali, 1998.

<!-- image -->

breaks.  When a fire  arrives  at  the  border  of  a harvested field, it usually dies out.

In separate interviews, local hunters agreed that the decline in the proportion of grasses has adversely  affected  the  habitat  of  a  formerly abundant prey, the cane rat ( Thryonomys swinderianus ).  Hunters indicated that cattle raising and bush burning had forced the cane rat 'to leave the area.' Hunting pressure must also be considered an important factor in the cane rat's disappearance. 16

Responses to the fifth and final question on fuel-wood availability seemed to contradict the above views. Almost two-thirds of the sample of twenty-three  women  declared  that  it  had  become more difficult to find wood due to population growth, the expansion of area under cultivation,  and  the  greater  distance  of  fields  from the village. 17  These responses suggest that wood is  more  difficult  to  procure  as  a  result  of  increased  demand and the burden of carrying it longer distances. They do not preclude the possibility that there are comparatively more trees in  the  landscape  in  comparison  to  twenty  to thirty years ago. Indeed, a quarter of the women reported that it  was  easier  for  them  to  collect wood for three reasons: (1) there are more trees today in comparison to when they were younger (2) the lopping of tree branches by Fulbe herders to give browse to their cattle during the dry season, 18  and (3) because one is free to burn all types of wood today in comparison to the past, when smoky wood was not tolerated. Ten percent of the respondents did not see any changes in the general availability of fuel wood.

To summarize the results of the Katiali household survey, a clear majority of farmers believe that the most striking change in the savanna environment is that it has become more wooded over  the  past  thirty  years.  They  attribute  this increase  in  trees  and  shrubs  to  the  growing number of livestock, especially Fulbe cattle, and less  aggressive bush fires. Grazing pressure and early dry-season fires combine to reduce the intensity of burns. The shift in the proportion of woody and herbaceous plants suggests a major change in savanna ecology due to a changing fire regime.

It is possible that farmers' emphasis on livestock  and  environmental  changes  was  influenced by their strained relations with the Fulbe. A conflictual relationship exists between farmers  and herders over the persistent problem of uncompensated  crop  damage  caused  by  Fulbe cattle (Bassett 1988, 1994). Blaming the Fulbe for  what might be perceived as negative environmental changes would not seem unusual under these circumstances. There are two factors, however, that weigh against a biased interpretation of environmental dynamics. First, farmers do not perceive the expansion of trees in negative terms. To the contrary, they view more trees in the landscape as a positive development because trees will enrich fallow soils while standing,  as  well  as  when  cut  and  burned  in  newly opened fields. It remains to be seen if more trees and  roots  will  hinder  the  cultivation  of  these fields  by  ox-drawn  plows.  Second,  there  was strong agreement among herders and farmers on the  nature  and  dynamics  of  environmental change. The Fulbe also perceived the landscape as becoming more wooded; in explaining the dynamics of environmental change, however, they gave equal emphasis to the expansion of cropland and cattle numbers in the region.

In  three  separate  group  interviews,  Fulbe herders  commented on the expansion of both fields  and  trees  in  the  landscape.  Sita  Sangare exclaimed that,

Before, you could go all the way to Tiébila (15 km to the southeast of Katiali) without seeing a field. Now all that has changed. There are more fields and more cattle. . . . The cattle have eaten the grass which has allowed trees to grow' (Sangare 1995).

Informants  declared  that  there  are  too  many cattle in the region. A major factor behind the influx of cattle is the pastoral dam constructed in 1983 one km southwest of Katiali, which provides a year-round supply of good drinking water. Another factor is the decline in tse-tse flies in the region (Erdelen et al. 1994).

There  was  a  consensus  among  Fulbe  informants  that  grass  cover  has  declined  and  trees have expanded as a result of higher grazing pressure, soil trampling, and  declining rainfall. Grasses that are no longer common are Andropogon gayanus , Rottobellia exalta , and Pennisetum pedicellatum. These highly palatable species appear in fallow fields after two to three years of rest.  Under  heavy  grazing  pressure,  however, they are replaced by less palatable  annual grasses.  The  disappearance  of Andropogon and other perennial grasses in the early years of long fallow cycles indicates that the soil is not reconstituting itself as it would in the absence of cattle (see below). Pastoralists attributed this vegetation  change  to  the  combination  of  grazing pressure and agricultural practices. One herder exclaimed:

There  are  far  too  many  cattle,  and  there  is  not enough rain. There used to be some rainfall during the dry season, which produced fresh grasses. Not any more. . . . There are too many animals and too many fields. It is more difficult to graze animals because  you  have  to  avoid  crop  damage  (Sangare 1995).

One informant referred to the increased use of herbicides by peasant farmers as another reason for the decline in palatable species.

In summary, like farmers, herders believe that the savanna has become increasingly wooded in recent  decades.  They  attribute  the  decline  in good forage grasses primarily to heightened grazing pressure and reduced rainfall. Increased grazing  pressure  is  thought  to  be  the  result  of  the combined expansion of cropland and cattle in the region. Herders clearly sensed a squeeze on range  resources  as  relatively  less  land  is  now available  for  grazing.  Despite  these  pressures, the  Fulbe  believe  that  rangelands  are  still  in good condition and that their cattle find good pastures  farther  south  during  their  seasonal 100-300-km trek.

The  Tagbanga  survey  elicited  remarkably similar  perceptions  of  environmental  change. Forty-two individuals residing in three communities (Tagbanga, Tiakaha, Nahoualakaha) were asked a series of questions pertaining to the evolution of the savanna, the frequency of fire, the availability of wood for construction and cooking, and access to arable land. In response to the question, if the savanna was more or less wooded since their childhood, more than half (57 percent) declared that it had become more wooded. Five percent of the respondents said that it had become less wooded. Fully 38 percent gave evasive  responses.  Concerning  the  frequency  of bush fires, nearly three-quarters (74 percent) of the respondents stated that they were less frequent. Another 11 percent believed they were more frequent while 14 percent had no opinion.

A surprising  finding  was  that  all  of  the  respondents stated that it was easier to find wood for construction and cooking today than in the

past. This is logical in light of the view that the landscape  is  more  wooded,  but  surprising  in light of the density of population. When asked if there was more or less land available for cultivation today versus the past, 48 percent declared that there was less land due to population increases, while 43 percent of the respondents stated that more land was available due to the breakup of collective fields, the individualization of holdings, and the emigration of young men.

In  summary,  the  Tagbanga  survey  indicates that most people believe that the landscape has become more wooded, that wood is more readily available for construction and cooking purposes, and that bush fires are not as intense today as they were in the past. These observations are remarkably similar to those made by land users in the Katiali area. In the following section, we examine the literature on savanna ecology to determine if there is a scientific basis to these locally perceived landscape changes.

## Fire, Cattle, and Savanna Ecology

Savannas are plant communities characterized by a continuous grass layer in which trees and  bushes  of  varying  height  and  density  are found (Adams 1996; Menaut 1983). In natural savannas  (i.e., regularly  burned  and  lightly grazed lands), perennial grasses account for up to 95 percent of the grass cover. The extent of ligneous cover is the criteria most often used in the nomenclature to classify savanna-plant communities. According to Riou (1995: 45-46, 56-65,  96-100)  an  open  forest  [ forêt  claire ]  is made up of tall  trees  (8-20  m)  which  almost form a continuous upper story (60-80 percent) and a practically continuous herbaceous, primarily  grass  understory.  The  tree  cover  becomes more dense and irregular in the savanna woodland [ savane boisée ]  where trees between 5 and 18 m cover 40-70 percent of the upper story. A tree savanna [ savane arboré ] is characterized by trees 8-15 m in height that enclose 20-50 percent of the upper story. A dense cover of grass encloses  90-95  percent  of  the  lower  story. Shrub  savannas  fall  into  two  categories:  open and dense. In an open shrub savanna [ savane arbustive claire ] with a rainfall regime similar to the Katiali  region,  low  shrubs  (2-8  m)  dominate and enclose 15-20 percent of the upper story while grasses cover up to 90 percent of the understory. A dense shrub savanna [ savane arbus- tive dense ] is characterized by a greater diversity and density of shrubs (more than 20 percent of the upper story) in comparison to open shrub savannas (Mitja 1992: 64-72).

In northern Côte d'Ivoire, all of these types are  present  and  usually  distributed  in  mosaic form across the landscape. Figure 2 illustrates a typical soil catena of the Katiali region and its associated  plant  communities.  This  cross-section does not capture the common mosaic pattern of savanna vegetation. The distribution of plant  communities  is  affected  by  a  number  of human and biophysical influences that include shifting cultivation, grazing, and fire, as well as topography, soils, and rainfall. Fire is considered to be so important in the maintenance of savannas that they have been called 'pyro-climatic' formations. It is widely believed that in the absence  of  fire,  savannas  would  become  increasingly  wooded.  Controlled  burning  in  experiment  stations  in  Côte  d'Ivoire  and  Nigeria shows that parcels protected from fire evolve toward forests, while those subjected to extremely hot, late-dry-season fires support very few trees. When fires are set during the early part of the dry  season,  fire-sensitive  trees  have  a  better chance of surviving a burn and tend to compete more  aggressively  with  grasses  (César  1994; Gillon  1983:  626-27)  (Figure  7).  During  the early part of the dry season, grasses are not completely  desiccated  and  will  not  burn  as  hot  as they would if burned in the latter part of the dry period (Gillon 1983: 618-19).

In addition to the time of year in which burning takes place, fire frequency and grazing pressure will also influence fire intensity and rates of bush encroachment. Heavy grazing reduces the amount of combustible material that will burn. Shrubs compete more effectively with grasses for soil nutrients and water when grasses are weakened  by  repeated  grazing  (Gillon  1983:  63637). Infrequent fires (e.g., once every three to five  years)  will  produce  higher  fuel  loads  and more  intense  burns.  More  frequent  (annual) burning will have the opposite effect. In summary, there is a consensus among savanna ecologists  that  frequent  and  early-dry-season  fires, combined with heavy grazing, are conducive to tree and shrub encroachment.

These  dynamics  are  particularly  striking  in fallow fields in the two study areas. Studies conducted  by  Mitja  (1990),  Bruzon  (1990),  and César and Coulibaly (1993) show that the reconstitution of soils and vegetation is severely

Figure 7. The impact on vegetation of fire control experiments at Konkondékro (Côte d'Ivoire). When fire is prohibited (parcel X), the savanna evolves towards a dense forest; intense late-dry-season fires in parcel Z result in either a grass or open shrub savanna; less violent early-dry-season fires lead to more wooded savannas in parcel Y. Source: Adjanohoun 1964: 131-32; Monnier 1974: 68-69.

<!-- image -->

disrupted by heavy grazing and weak fires. When grazing is light and fire is permitted to pass, a fallow field will evolve into a savanna woodland within 20-40 years time, depending on soil type and total rainfall. 19  César and Coulibaly (1993: 416-18) present a six-stage model of 'natural fallow evolution' in a lightly grazed savanna on sandy-clay soils north of Korhogo.

1. Recent fallow (1-3 yrs): forbs and annual grasses dominate ( Euphorbia hirta , Borreia verticillata , Pennisetum spp.
2. Young fallow (2-5 yrs): perennial grasses such as Andropogon gayanus and Imperata cylindrica begin to spread; young trees and shrubs begin to grow by suckers or crown sprouting.
3. Andropogon  gayanus fallow  (5-15  yrs): Andropogon  gayanus becomes  dominant and reaches its maximum extent; soil humus develops due to extensive above and underground biomass; trees attain a basal diameter of 5 to 10 cm.
4. Old fallow (15-25 yrs): Andropogon gayanus continues  to  dominate  but  savanna grasses  like Hyparrhenia  subplumosa , Andropogon  chiensis ,  and Schizachyrium  sanguineum begin to overtake it in later years.
5. Nearly reconstituted savanna (25-30 yrs):  savanna  grasses  now  dominate  (95 percent)  the  herbaceous  layer. Andropogon gayanus is eliminated. 'The herbaceous strata has attained a state of equilibrium but the ligneous population is still young' (César and Coulibaly 1993: 417).
6. Reconstituted  savanna  (greater  than  30 yrs):  young  tree  savanna  evolves  into  a wooded savanna or open deciduous forest. Fire passes regularly.

The replacement of Andropogon gayanus by savanna grasses in stage 4 is a sign to farmers that soil  quality  is  sufficiently  good  to  farm  once again.

Heavy  grazing  and  weak  fires  effectively block this evolutionary process. Xavier LeRoy's study of the evolution of fallow fields in Synofan, a community less than 100 km west of Katiali,  showed  that  15-year  fallows  had  not  yet evolved to the Andropogon gayanus stage (LeRoy 1993). They were instead dominated by annual leguminous  plants  ( Zornia  glochidiata , Alysicarpus ovalifolius , Tephrosia spp. ) and characterized by 'all the signs of pastoral degradation: bush invasion, the disappearance of perennial grasses, the multiplication of dicotyledons, and an over-

all decline in herbaceous ground cover' (LeRoy 1993: 167). Soil organic matter was not developing  in  these  heavily  grazed  fallows,  forcing Synofan farmers to search for much older fallows to cultivate. The case studies of Katiali and Tagbanga illustrate this dynamic operating in areas with contrasting population densities.

In summary, farmer and herder perceptions of environmental change are supported by extensive  research  on  savanna  ecology  and  range management in the tropics. Both the general literature  and  that  focused  on  northern  Côte d'Ivoire  demonstrate  clear  links  between  increased  grazing  pressure  and  changing  fire  regimes on the competition between woody and herbaceous species.  Local  perceptions  and  the scientific literature agree that woody species become dominant in landscapes where heavy grazing and less intense fires have allowed tree and shrub  seedlings  to  establish  themselves.  Controlled  experiments  show  that  areas  protected from grazing, and in which late-dry-season fires are allowed to pass, evolve toward savannas in which  perennial  grasses  dominate.  Given  the importance of fire in shaping the 'natural' vegetation in this area, we can conclude that this is a nonequilibrium environment characterized by a  variety  of  vegetation  states  and  transitions depending  on  the  timing  and  intensity  of  fire (Behnke  and  Scoones  1993;  Sprugel  1991; Westoby et al. 1989). In areas where aggressive fires dominate, the landscape will evolve in the stage-like  manner outlined by César and Zoumana.  Where  fires  are  less  aggressive,  due  to changes in biomass or in their timing and frequency associated with livestock raising, different  vegetation  states  will  dominate.  In  short, the  farmer-herder  survey  and  specialist  literature  concur  that  the  increasing  dominance  of woody growth in the Katiali and Tagbanga areas is linked to changing fire regimes and land use. In the following section, we present the results of aerial-photo interpretation to determine whether one can detect a shift in the proportion of  woody  versus  grassy  savanna  types  between the 1950s and 1990s.

## Local Perceptions and Aerial-Photo Interpretation of Vegetation Change

Our analysis of aerial photographs was constrained  by  the  dates,  coverage,  and  scale  of available photos. For Katiali, aerial photos were available  for  1956  and  1989  at  the  scale  of 1:50000, but the coverage of the two years is different. Only a 65 km 2  portion of the Katiali territory  was  included  in  the  1989  photographs. Despite  the  limited  coverage,  we  believe  that the land-cover changes discussed below are representative of the wider region. For Tagbanga, aerial photos are available for 1956 and 1993. 20 The territories of a number of neighboring villages are included in the Tagbanga analysis for two reasons. First, the relatively high density of villages  makes for an imbricated land use pattern. Tagbanga farmers cultivate land controlled by lineages in neighboring villages. Second, the area covered in the aerial photos covers all of these villages (Figure 1).

The  relatively  small  scale  of  these  photos hinders interpretation in two significant ways. First, it is impossible to distinguish between savanna  woodlands  and  open  deciduous  forests. Similarly,  one  cannot  differentiate  tree  savannas  from  dense  shrub  savannas  at  a  scale  of 1:50000. As a result, we were forced to collapse these  four  savanna-plant  formations  into  two categories,  open  forest-savanna  woodland  and dense  savanna  shrub,  in  preparing  the  landcover maps for Katiali (Figure 8) and Tagbanga (Figure  9).  Second,  the  extent  of  bush  encroachment is not evident in these photos because  of  the  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the height of woody plants. Thus, what might appear on photos as woodlands may in fact be a tree savanna experiencing heavy shrub invasion. On the ground, there is a noticeable difference between  a  savanna  woodland  characterized  by uniformly tall trees and a bush-encroached tree savanna marked by trees and shrubs of varying height but exhibiting a density comparable to a wooded savanna. These interpretive difficulties point to the limits of aerial-photo interpretation as a method of analysis. Yet when used in conjunction  with  the  other  methods  employed in this  study  (household  surveys,  focus-group discussions,  ground  truthing,  vegetation  transects,  or  review  of  the  savanna-ecology  literature), aerial photos can be a useful interpretive tool.

## Land Cover Changes in Katiali, 1956 and 1989

The  most  striking  change  in  Katiali's  land cover is the dramatic drop in open bush savanna

a.

Figure 8. Land-cover changes between a. 1956 and b. 1989, Katiali (Côte d'Ivoire).

<!-- image -->

and the noticeable increase in area categorized as woodlands (savanna woodland and open deciduous forest) (Figures 8 and 10 ). Open bush declined from 46 percent to 12 percent between 1956 and 1989, while the area in woodlands increased from 4 percent to 31 percent of the area. These findings confirm the perceptions of local residents that the landscape has become more wooded. It has also become more cultivated as shown by the increase in area in cropland. This category  includes  both  fallow  lands  for  which the field  limits  were  still  visible  in  the  photos and land under cultivation. The area in grasslands and gallery forests remained relatively stable while the area in dense bush declined by 6 percent.

a.

Figure 9. Land-cover changes between a. 1956 and b. 1993, Tagbanga (Côte d'Ivoire).

<!-- image -->

To  examine  more  closely  the  dynamics  of vegetation change, we visited a number of locations  in  the  Katiali  area  where  informants indicated  the  landscape  had  become  more wooded. 21  We were shown two types of wooded places. The first was located within a 3-km ra- dius of the village where both agricultural and grazing  pressure  is  relatively  high.  Vegetation transects 50 m in length were run along different sections of the soil catena in the area locally known as 'Kafongon.' Figure 11 shows the results of one of these transects located 1 km from

Figure 10. Land-cover changes, Katiali, 1956 and 1989.

<!-- image -->

the village in a 15-year-old fallow field situated at the upper slope on sandy-gravely soils. Before being  cultivated  in  the  late  1970s  and  early 1980s, it was an open tree savanna dominated by the economically useful and protected Parkia biglobosa and Vitellaria  paradoxa and  perennial savanna grasses such as Schizachyrium sanguineum. One informant said that when he was a child in the late 1950s and early 1960s, one could easily see into the distance because there were so few trees. He also mentioned that fires were so intense, they would light up the night sky  (Kone  1998).  In  1998,  the  site  was  obviously  closed  in  on  all  sides  and  experiencing shrub invasion. It was described by Jean César, an authority on range management of tropical savannas who visited the Kafongon site with us, as a 'bushed invaded savanna woodland that is becoming a dense open forest dominated by Isoberlinia doka but with an understory (i.e., grass layer)  that  does  not  correspond  to  its  age' (César 1998). According to César and Coulibaly's model of fallow vegetation succession, the site should have been dominated by Andropogon gayanus, but there were only a few tufts of this perennial  present.  Instead,  the  site  was  dominated  by  the  less  palatable  annuals Tephrosia pedicellata , Hyptis suaveolensis , and Cassia mimo-

Figure 11. Structure of ligneous species in 1997, Kafongon transect, Katiali.

<!-- image -->

Figure 12. Coauthor Tom Bassett and plant specialist Amani N'guessan record ligneous species along a 50-m transect in the Kafongon area of Katiali, January, 1998.

<!-- image -->

sidies. From a range manager's perspective, the herbaceous layer was 'extremely degraded' (César 1998).

Using  the  contact-point  method  adapted from  Daget  et  Poissonet  (1971)  by  César  and Zoumana (1995), we found that 83 percent of the trees encountered along the Kafongon transect touched our pole at a height less than 4 m. This low height suggests a strong bush-encroachment dynamic (Figure 12). A mosaic pattern of burnt patches indicated low levels of flammable biomass  and  low-intensity  bush  fires  (Figure  13). Three species of trees dominated the transect: Piliostigma thonningii (34 percent), Acacia sieberiana (23  percent),  and Daniellia  oliveri (16  percent). 22 César  described  the  site  as  a 'tree  fallow' in which trees rather than perennial grasses are reconstituting soil-fertility levels.

The second type of 'wooded place' we were shown was located in areas more distant ( &gt; 3 km) from  Katiali  where  village  cattle  do  not  graze but which are more frequented by Fulbe herds.

In these locations (e.g., Loupka transect, Figure 14), trees and shrubs were seen expanding out from the edge of small clumps of trees to form larger  agglomerations.  Even  in  the  absence  of grazing pressure and changing fire regimes, trees expand  in  savannas  in  this  manner  (Skarpe 1991). Informants noted, however, that the agglomeration  process  had  accelerated  and  that trees had succeeded in establishing themselves beyond the edge of these groves out into open areas. This became apparent to us when we examined  the  tree  and  grass  species  dominating the Loupka site-a 20-year fallow with sandyclay soils that had been cultivated between 1973 and  1979.  Following  César  and  Coulibaly's scheme, the fallow should have been dominated by Andropogon gayanus and savanna perennials like Hyparhennia  dissoluta. Although Andropogon and Schizachyrium were  present,  annual plants were everywhere, especially the unpalatable Ctenium  newtonii , Elionuros  ciliaris ,  and Tephrosia pedicellata. After 20 years, one would

Figure 13. Uneven burn pattern in heavily grazed 15-year-old fallow in Kafongon area of Katiali, January, 1998.

<!-- image -->

also expect to find trees like Isoberlinia 15-20 m in height. Instead, all of the trees we encountered along a 50-m-long transect were below 4 m. The three most common species were Dicrostachys cinerea (34 percent), Piliostigma thonningii (27 percent), and Isoberlina doka (20 percent). 23 Audru  (1975: 31) identifies Isoberlinia and Piliostigma as  aggressive  invaders  of  disturbed savannas.

These  invading  woody  species  would  normally  have  been  checked  by  late-dry-season fires, but grazing pressure and changes in fire intensity have allowed these pioneering species to survive. Perennial grasses, with their dense root systems and tall height, compete vigorously with tree seedlings for water, soil nutrients, and sunlight. As grazing pressure increases, the root systems  do  not  develop  and  grass  height  diminishes. Under these conditions, trees can compete more  effectively  and  will  spread,  especially  if bush fires are not too intense. We predict that the Loupka site will evolve into a more thickly wooded area in the next five years under existing conditions. The case of Tagbanga offers further  proof  that  the  desertification  narrative  is extremely problematic, even in the more densely settled areas around Korhogo.

## Land Cover Changes in Tagbanga 1956 and 1993

Figures 9 and 15 illustrate the salient changes in the Tagbanga area. The most surprising trend is  the  overall  decline  in  cropland  and  the  increase  in  savanna  vegetation.  The  cultivated area  (including  fallow)  declined  from  66  percent to 55 percent of the total area. This trend makes sense in light of the high rates of emigration  and  decline  in  population  density  in  the subprefecture of Torioniaradougou between 1975 and 1988. Savanna vegetation cover increased from 34 percent of the area in 1956 to 44 percent in 1993. The category of savanna vegetation that showed the greatest increase is tree and dense shrub savannas. It increased from 16 percent  of  the  area  in  1956  to  25  percent  in 1993 (Figure 15). This change is particularly apparent  in  the  western  portion  of  the  land-use map shown in Figure 9. The amount of land in

Figure 14. Structure of ligneous species in 1997, Loupka transect, Katiali.

<!-- image -->

forests  and  open  bush  savanna  remained  relatively stable while the area in grass savannas increased by 2 percent. A striking difference between  the  two  research  sites  is  the  important presence of open forests and savanna woodlands ('woodlands') in  Katiali  and  their  absence  in Tagbanga.  Another  contrast  is  the  decline  of tree  and  dense  bush  savannas  in  Katiali  and their  significant  increase  in  Tagbanga.  This diversity of savanna vegetation types points to one of the many lessons stemming from the two case studies.

## The Lessons of the Katiali and Tagbanga Case Studies

A major finding of this comparative research on land-cover changes in the Katiali and Tagbanga areas is that, contrary to received wisdom, the savanna has become more wooded over the past  thirty  years.  This  finding  runs  counter  to the dominant narrative, which assumes that the savanna has become less wooded and increasingly  dominated by grass savannas. It also extends, both geographically and analytically, the

Figure 15. Land-cover changes, Tagbanga, 1956 and 1993.

<!-- image -->

findings of Fairhead and Leach on the expansion of  wooded  landscapes  in  the  forest-savanna transition zone of Guinée (Fairhead and Leach 1996) to the sudanian savanna.

A second finding points to the diversity of savanna vegetation communities in the Korhogo region.  The  similarities  and  differences  in  the transformation of the Tagbanga and Katiali savanna areas underscore the importance of temporal  and  spatial  variations  in  environmental change. This finding conforms to the scientific literature  on  savanna  ecology  that  points  to  a wide  range  of  plant  communities,  which  are commonly distributed in mosaic form across the landscape. The most important factors influencing  the  nature  and  direction  of  vegetation change  are  farming  systems,  grazing  pressure, population  density,  and  changing  fire  regimes. These factors,  which are themselves linked to changing political and economic processes extending beyond the region (e.g., cotton-development policies, immigration of Fulbe herders, or farmer-herder conflicts), interact with a host of  biophysical  factors  such  as  soil  type,  slope, and rainfall to create temporally and locationally specific outcomes.

A  third  finding  of  this  research  is  its  relevance  to  environmental  planning.  Despite  its problematic scientific status, the desertification narrative currently guides environmental policy. For  example,  NEAP-CI  recommendations  to combat the assumed reduction in tree cover include  the  regulation  of  bush  fires  through  a range of increasingly coercive measures, restrictions on wood cutting, and the promotion of village-level tree planting (RCI 1994a). In light of the findings of this case study, such policy recommendations can be seen as misconceived and a waste of limited resources. The disjuncture between national  and  global  environmental  discourses and actual vegetation-change patterns is alarming. Our findings show that although desertification  is  not  taking  place,  heavy  grazing and  early  fires  have  significantly  reduced  the quality of the savanna for livestock raising. Tree and shrub invasion and a highly degraded herbaceous layer were evident in both the Katiali and Tagbanga study areas. Since livestock development is a priority of the Ministry of Agriculture, one would think that rangeland rehabilitation would  be  a  centerpiece  of  the  Côte  d'Ivoire NEAP.  Not  surprisingly,  it  is  nowhere  to  be found in NEAP documents which are more concerned with reforestation than range condition.

While environmental analysts and planners are occupied with  an  imaginary  environmental problem, tree and bush encroachment continues unabated. This disjointed scale problem also produces  its  contradictions.  For  example,  the Ivorian NEAP's recommended regulation, permitting only early -dry-season fires, would result in further bush invasion. To improve range conditions, degraded areas will have to be protected from grazing for at least two or three years, and woody growth must be controlled by extremely hot (i.e., late ) bush fires (César 1994).

## Conclusion

Given the extraordinary amount of environmental planning currently underway in Africa and its far-reaching implications on land use, access and management, one obvious conclusion of this study is that further research on environmental-change  dynamics  is  of  utmost  importance. Indeed, the World Bank places the identification of environmental problems and their underlying causes as the first step in the NEAP process. Yet, from all indications, the Bank does not consider this to be a particularly challenging phase.  Despite  the  glaring  gaps  in  our  knowledge, the Bank believes that most environmental issues are easy to identify and can be classified along a simple color scheme. 24  A conclusion of this paper is that identifying environmental problems and their causes is one of the most difficult  and  time-consuming  stages  in  environmental planning and policy making.

One of the challenges in confronting the environmental-data problem is that so little data exist  with  any  meaningful  time  depth.  Even where  data  like  aerial  photographs  do  exist, their relatively small scale rarely permits one to make little more than very general statements. This situation demands that multiple approaches  be  pursued  to  determine  the  spatial and temporal dynamics of environmental change that are not apparent in aerial photos. In this study, we have combined household-survey research focused on farming systems and environmental perceptions with aerial-photo interpretation and vegetation transects to identify the general trends in vegetation change. This multiscale,  multimethod  approach  yielded  different results  from  the  so-called  'participatory  approach' followed in the NEAP process, in which the opinions of selected individuals from differ-

ent social strata were solicited in public meetings. Not surprisingly, peasants and herders were reticent in such fora.

A  third  point  centers  on  competing  discourses on environmental change. In contrasting  the  environmental  narratives  expressed  in World Bank and NEAP documents with those of rural land users, it would be misleading to suggest that a homogeneous view prevails on either side. For example, peasant farmers downplayed their own role in transforming savanna vegetation  through  their  agricultural  activities  by pointing their finger at Fulbe herders as the primary agents of environmental change. This tendency to 'blame' the Fulbe must be contextualized  in  the  often  bitter  conflicts  that  exist between farmers and herders in northern Côte d'Ivoire. Similarly, the tendency of the Fulbe to deny their use of fire as a range management tool and to 'blame' farmers and hunters for bush fires must be seen in light of these land-use conflicts.

Fourth, it is also clear that the environmentalcrisis lexicon is widespread. Despite the disparate goals of the World Bank, the Ministry of the Environment,  and  environmental  nongovernmental  organizations,  they  share  an  environmental-crisis imaginary that gives meaning and an immediacy to their missions. The visual imagery of an expanding desert is a powerful framing device that demands equally dramatic solutions, such as the establishment of green belts along the eighth parallel and imprisonment as punishment for lighting bush fires.

Finally, there are striking historical parallels between colonial-era writings on land degradation  and  control  and  contemporary  environmental planning. Both blame farmers and herders for recklessly destroying the land  and altering local climates, programmatic  statements abound while good data are hard to come by, and proposed conservation measures invariably involve increased state intervention in the countryside with an emphasis on transforming land-rights systems, specifically the exclusion of local people from protected areas. These recurring themes, principal players, and silences regarding  the  goals  and  resource  management strategies of farmers and herders suggest that we are operating within a regional discursive formation. What is different between the 1930s and the 1990s is the number of contestants involved in environmental management. In addition to the state, there are NGOs and development-aid organizations seeking to establish their author- ity and legitimacy as environmental advocates and stewards. The desertification narrative persists in part because it serves to mobilize support for these groups' varied agendas. This paper has privileged the voices and experiences of farmers and  herders  whose  understanding  of  environmental  change  is  more  nuanced  and  sophisticated than the dominant narrative. From all indications, this local understanding of the nature and  direction  of  environmental  change  is  not reflected in the Côte d'Ivoire National Environmental Action Plan. As in the past and despite the  rhetoric  of  decentralization  and  participatory planning (Little 1994; Ribot 1999; Schroeder 1999), this case study shows that the perceptions of ordinary men and women are marginalized in  contemporary  environmental  planning  in sub-Saharan Africa.

## Acknowledgments

The field research on which this paper is based was supported  by  the  John  D.  and  Catherine  T.  MacArthur Foundation. In addition to the coauthors, the collaborative  research  team  included  Mameri  Camara,  Sinali  Coulibaly,  and  Tiona  Ouattara.  We thank our Ivorian collaborators as well as the following individuals for their comments on earlier drafts of this paper: David Anderson, Chantal Blanc-Pamard, Jean Boutrais, Jean César, Zoumana Coulibaly, Donald Crummey, Leslie Gray, Bruce Hannon, Alex Winter-Nelson, Yeo Kolo, and Karl Zimmerer.

## Notes

1. The IDA is the 'soft loan window' of the World Bank Group that offers loans to member countries with average annual per-capita incomes of $1,465 or less at concessionary rates.
2. On the social construction of nature in humanenvironmental  research  in  geography,  see  Demeritt (1996).
3. Measurements were made every 50 cm along the 50-m transect. If a woody plant came into contact with the 8-m high pole at this interval, we noted  the  species  of  plant  and  the  height  at which  it  touched  the  pole.  Figures  11  and  14 show the number of times a species touched the pole (y-axis) at a specific height (x-axis).
4. The relatively higher levels of male emigration from the subprefecture of Niofouin resulted in a population structure in which there were just 88 males for every 100 females (Kientz 1991: Annex 4, p. 2).
5. The 1975 census put Katiali's population at 1492

- persons. By 1988, it had increased to 1870 (See Kientz 1991: Annex 5, p. 20).
6. The  two  surveyed  villages  were  Takpalakaha (S-P Napié) and Sologo (S-P Tioroniaradougou).
7. The population structure of the subprefecture of Tioroniaradougou indicates that males dominate the migration stream. There were just 82 males for  every  100  females  in  the  subprefecture  in 1988 (Kientz 1991: Annex 4, p. 2).
8. The oxen data are for the departments of Boundiali,  Korhogo,  and  Ferké,  which  together  accounted for 87 percent of the oxen in Côte d'Ivoire in 1991.
9. The success of this control program continues to rest  on  the  placement  of  conical-shaped  traps treated with Deltamethrine along the course of gallery  forests.  Sita  Sangare  also  believed  that tse-tse flies are killed by the insecticides (Biticol and Butox) owners spray on their animals.
10. The livestock census was conducted annually by village-based extension agents of the  nowdefunct national livestock-development agency (SODEPRA).
11. The land area of the Korhogo II and Niofouin pastoral zones amounted to 1680 km 2  and 1650 km 2  respectively.
12. Fraternité Matin is controlled by the Democratic Party of Côte d'Ivoire (PDCI).
13. Since  1986,  committees  were  nominally  organized at the prefecture and subprefecture levels to raise local awareness about the dangers of bush fires.  The  mission  of  the Comité  national  de défense  des  forêts  et  de  la  lutte  conre  les  feux  de brousse is  'to  study and propose to government the  methods  and  means  for  fighting  bush  fires and for protecting the forest ('360 millions pour équiper le Comité de lutte' 1998: 13).' A miniscule budget ($5200 in 1998) severely limits this group's activities.
14. The  exchange  rate  over  this  period  was  500 FCFA to one U.S. dollar.
15. Fire is also used to control ticks and tse-tse flies (Gillon 1983: 630, 636).
16. Cane rats were the second most common animal sold  in  bushmeat  markets  in  1982.  They  accounted for 19 percent of all game sold to merchants  visiting  Katiali  weekly  over  a  twelvemonth period. By 1997, cane rats accounted for just 3 percent of the animals sold to commerce. The green monkey ( Cercopithecus aethiops,  var. sabaeus) was the most abundant animal sold in 1982, accounting for 41 percent of all bushmeat sales.  As  they  are  commonly  found  in  wooded areas, one would think that their numbers might increase with the expansion of tree cover in the region.  Not  so.  The  number  of  green  monkeys marketed dropped to 7 percent of all animals sold in 1997. Hunters generally agreed that the green monkey's decline is due to hunting pressure.
17. Women typically collect wood in the vicinity of the household's fields.
18. The most commonly browsed tree species are: Ficus gnatholcarpa, Pterocarpus erinaceus, Ficus capensis , and the young leaves of Pericopsis laxiflora and Isolberlinia doka.
19. Fallows will evolve into wooded savannas in 20years time in higher rainfall areas south of Korhogo  on  sandy-clay  soils.  This  evolution  will take  up  to  40  years  in  the  northern  savannas characterized by sandy-gravel leached soils and lower rainfall.
20. The  1993  aerial  photos  are  at  the  scale  of 1:20000.
21. Our  Senufo  and  Jula  informants  distinguished between  two  general  types  of  savanna  landscapes: wooded and open. The Senufo say tétungo to  indicate  'a  place  where  there  are  a  lot  of trees,' in contrast to an 'open place' or ' téfigue. ' In Jula, the comparable terms are ' a  yoro  tura ' and ' a yoro kenegbe. '
22. In  a  nearby  10 × 10-m  plot,  trees  were  dominated by Desmodium velutinum (28 percent), Piliostigma  thonningii (21  percent),  and Gardenia erubescens (15 percent).
23. In an adjacent 10 × 10-m plot, the dominant species were: Isoberlina doka (52 percent), Piliostigma thonningii (15 percent), and Dicrostachys cinerea (11 percent).
24. Blue  for  water-related  issues,  green  for  land, brown for urban, and red for cultural-heritage issues (Greve et al. 1995: 8).

## References

- Abel, N. O. J., and Blaikie, P. 1989. Land Degradation, Stocking Rates and Conservation Policies in the Communal Rangelands of Botswana and Zimbabwe. Land  Degradation  and  Rehabilitation 1(2):101-23.
- Adams, M. E. 1996. Savanna Environments. In The Physical Geography of Africa , ed. W. M. Adams, A. S. Goudie, and A. R. Orme, pp. 196-210. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Adams, W. M. 1995. Green Development Theory. In Power of Development , ed. J. Crush, pp. 87-99. London: Routledge.
- Adjanohoun,  E.  1964. Végétation  des  savanes  et  des rochers découvertes en Côte d'Ivoire Centrale. Mémoire ORSTOM 7. Paris: ORSTOM.
- Anderson,  D.,  and  Grove,  R.  1987.  Introduction: The Scramble for Eden: Past, Present and Future in African Conservation. In Conservation in Africa: People, Policies and Practice , ed. D. Anderson and R. Grove, pp. 1-12. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Aubréville, A. 1938. La Forêt Coloniale: Les forêts de

- l'Afrique Occidentale Française. Paris: Académie des Sciences Coloniales. Annales, 9.
- Audru, J. 1977. Les ligneux et subligneux des parcours naturels soudano-guinéens en Côte d'Ivoire. Note de Synthèse N o . 8. Maisons-Alfort: IEMVT.
- Bassett, T. J. 1986. Fulani Herd Movements. The Geographical Review 76:233-48.
- ---.  1988.  The  Political  Ecology  of  PeasantHerder Conflicts in Northern Ivory Coast. Annals  of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers 78:453-72.
- ---.  1993a.  Introduction:  The  Land  Question and  Agricultural  Transformation  in  Sub-Saharan Africa. In Land in African Agrarian Systems , ed. T. J. Bassett and D. Crummey, pp. 331. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- ---. 1994. Hired Herders and Herd Management in Fulani Pastoralism (Northern Côte d'Ivoire). Cahiers d'Études Africaines 34:147-73.
- ---. 1995. L'introduction de la propriété de la terre: La cartographie et la Banque Mondiale en Côte d'Ivoire. In Terre, terroir, territoire: Les tensions foncières ,  ed.  Chantal  Blanc-Pamard et Luc Cambrézy, pp. 395-420. Paris: Editions ORSTOM.
- Batterbury, S. P. J., and Bebbington, A. J. 1998. Environmental  Histories,  Access  to  Resources  and Landscape Change: An Introduction. Special issue, Land Degradation and Development , 10:27991.
- Batterbury,  S.;  Forsyth,  T.;  and  Thomson,  K.  1997. Environmental Transformations in Developing Countries:  Hybrid  Research  and  Democratic Policy. The Geographical Journal 163:126-32.
- Behnke, R., and Scoones, I. 1993. Rethinking Range Ecology:  Implications  for  Rangeland  Management in Africa. In Range Ecology at Disequilibrium: New Models of Natural Variability and Pastoral  Adaptation  in  African  Savannas ,  ed.  R. Behnke, I. Scoones, and C. Kerven, pp. 1-30. London: Overseas Development Institute.
- Biot, Y.; Blaikie, P .; Jackson, C.; and Palmer-Jones, R. 1995. Rethinking Research on Land Degadation in Developing  Countries ,  World  Bank  Discussion Paper 289. Washington: World Bank.
- Blaikie, P. 1994. Political Ecology in the 1990s. An Evolving View of Nature and Society. CASID Distinguished Speaker Series 13. Michigan State University.
- ---. 1995. Changing Environments or Changing Views? Geography 80 (348): 203-14.
- Boudet, G. 1991. Manuel sur les pâturages tropicaux et les cultures fourragères. IEMVT Collection Manuels et Précis d'Elevage 4. Paris: La Documentation Française.
- Boutrais, J. 1995. Hautes terres d'élevage au Cameroun , 2 vols. Paris: ORSTOM.
- Bruzon,  V.  1990. Les  Savanes  du  Nord  de  la  Côte d'Ivoire: Mesologie et Dynamique. Thèse de Doctorat, Université de Lille III.
- César, J. 1994. Gestion et aménagement de l'espace pastoral.  In A  la  Croisée  des  Parcours ,  ed.  C. Blanc-Pamard  and  J.  Boutrais,  pp.  111-45. Paris: Editions ORSTOM.
- ---. 1998. Interview, June 30, Katiali. --- and Coulibaly, Z. 1993. Conséquence de l'accroissement démographique sur la qualité de la jachère  dans  le  nord  de  la  Côte  d'Ivoire.  In La Jachère  en  Afrique  de  l'Ouest, ed.  C.  Floret and G. Serpantié,  pp.  415-34.  Paris:  Editions ORSTOM.
- --- and Zoumana, C. 1995. Comparaison de troupeaux mono et pluri-spécifiques sur une végétation de savane soudanienne à Korhogo (Côte d'Ivoire). Compte Rendu Technique 2, Natural Resource Development  and  Utilization  in  the  Sahel (IDESSA/CIRAD-EMVT).
- Cleaver, K., and Schreiber, G. 1994. Reversing the Spiral: The Population, Agriculture, and Environment Nexus in sub-Saharan Africa . Washington: World Bank.
- Compagnie Ivoirinne du Développement des Fibres Textiles (CIDT) 1993. Rapport Annuel des Activitiés. Bouaké: CIDT.
- Coppock, D. L. 1993. Vegetation and Pastoral Dynamics in the Southern Ethiopian Rangelands: Implications  for  Theory  and  Management.  In Range Ecology at Disequilibrium , ed. R. Behnke, I. Scoones,  and  C.  Kerven,  pp.  42-61.  London: Overseas Development Institute.
- Crush, J., ed. 1995a. The Power of Development. New York: Routledge.
- ---. 1995b. Introduction. In The Power of Development, ed.  J.  Crush,  pp.  1-23.  New  York: Routledge.
- Daget, P ., and Poissonet, J. 1971. Une méthode d'analyse phytologique des prairies: Critères d'application. Annales Agronomiques 22(1): 5-41.
- Demeritt,  D.  1996.  Social  Theory  and  the  Reconstruction of Science in Geography. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 21:484-503.
- Erdelen, W.; Müller, P.; Nagel, P.; Peveling, R.; and Weyrich,  J.  1994. Implications  écologiques  de  la lutte  anit-tse-tse  en  Côte  d'Ivoire  nord  et  centre. GTZ Project No. 87.2539.2. Rapport Final. Sarrebruck: GTZ.
- Escobar,  A.  1995. Encountering  Development:  The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Fairhead, J., and Leach, M. 1996. Misreading the African  Landscape:  Societyand  Ecology  in  a  ForestSavanna Mosaic. Cambridge,  U.K.:  Cambridge University Press.
- --- and ---. 1998. Reframing  Deforestation: Global  Analyses  and  Local  Realities:  Studies  in West Africa. Routledge: London.
- Falloux, F., and Talbort, L. 1993. Crisis and Opportunity:  Environment  and  Development  in  Africa. London: Earthscan.

- Ferguson, J. 1990. The Anti-Politics Machine: 'Development,' Depoliticization, and Bureaucratic Power in  Lesotho. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Gillon, D. 1983. The Fire Problem in Tropical Savannas. In Ecosystems of the World 13, Tropical Savannas, ed.  F .  Bourlière,  pp.  617-41.  Amsterdam: Elsevier.
- Gomé Gnohite, H. 1998. Ce que j'en pense. . . . Bulletin d'Information et de Sensibilisation Environnementale 2 (April): 14.
- Gooré  Bi,  Hue.  1999.  'Feux  dévasteurs.' Fraternité Matin. February 28.
- Gray,  L.  1997.  Land  Degradation  in  Southwestern Burkina  Faso:  The  Environmental  Effects  of Demographic and Agricultural  Change,  Ph.D. dissertation,  University  of  Illinois,  UrbanaChampaign.
- Greve, A. M.; Lampietti, J.; and Falloux, F. 1995. National  Environmental  Action  Plans  in  SubSaharan Africa. In Towards Environmentally Sustainable Development in Sub-Saharan Africa , Paper 6, Washington: World Bank.
- Hoffman, O. 1985. Pratiques pastorales et dynamique du couvert végétale en pays Lobi (Nord est de la Côte d'Ivoire). Collection  Travaux  et  Documents 189. Paris: ORSTOM.
- Kientz, A. 1991. Développement agro-pastoral et lutte anti-tsé-tsé, Côte d'Ivoire. Strasbourg: GTZ.
- Kone, Adama. 1998. Interview, June 30, Katiali.
- Leach, M., and Mearns, R., eds. The Lie of the Land: Challenging Received Wisdom on the African Environment. Oxford,  U.K.  and  Portsmouth,  NH: James Currey, Ltd. and Heinemann.
- LeRoy, X. 1993. Pratique de la jachère dans les terroirs Sénoufo du nord de la Côte d'Ivoire. In La Jachère  en  Afrique  de  l'Ouest ,  ed.  C.  Foret  and G. Serpantié, pp. 157-69. Paris: ORSTOM.
- Little, P . 1994. The Link between Local Participation and Improved Conservation: a Review of Issues and  Experiences.  In Natural  Connections:  Perspectives  in  Community-based  Conservation ,  ed. D.  Western  and  R.  M.  Wright,  pp.  347-72. Washington: Island Press.
- Menaut, J.-C. 1983. The Vegetation of African Savannas. In Ecosystems of the World 13, Tropical Savannas , ed. F . Bourlière, pp. 109-49. Amsterdam, Elsevier.
- Mitchell,  T.  1995.  The  Object  of  Development: America's Egypt. In The Power of Development. ed. J. Crush, pp. 129-57. New York: Routledge.
- Mitja, D. 1992. Influence de la culture itinérante sur la végétation d'une savane humide de Côte d'Ivoire. Collection Etudes et Thèses. Paris: ORSTOM.
- Monnier,  Y.  1974. Decouverte  aerienne  de  la  Côte d'Ivoire. Abidjan: Editions Photivoire.
- Mortimore, M. 1989. Adapting to Drought: Farmers, Famines and Desertification in West Africa. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- ---. 1998. Roots in the African Dust: Sustaining the Drylands. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Peet, R., and Watts, M., eds. 1996. Liberation Ecologies:  Environment,  Development,  Social  Movements. London: Routledge.
- Peters, P. 1994. 'Who's Local Here?' The Politics of Participation in Development. Cultural Survival Quarterly , Fall:22-25.
- République de la Côte d'Ivoire (RCI), Ministère de l'Environnement et du Tourisme, Plan National d'Action Pour l'Environnement. Cellule de Coordination. 1994a. Livre blanc de l'environnement de Côte d'Ivoire. Abidjan: PNAE-CI.
- ---, Cellule de Coordination. 1994b. Synthèse régionale: Région nord (Korhogo). Abidjan: PNAE-CI. ---, Cellule de Coordination. 1996. Declaration de Politique Environnementale. Abidjan: PNAE-CI.
- Ribot,  J.  1999.  Decentralization,  Participation  and Accountability in Sahelian Forestry: Legal Instruments of Political-Administrative Control. Africa 69: 23-65.
- Rich, B. 1994. Mortgaging the Earth: The World Bank, Environmental Impoverishment, and the Crisis of Development. Boston: Beacon Press.
- Riou, G. 1995. Savanes, l'herbe, l'arbre et l'homme en terres tropicales. Paris: Masson/Armand Colin.
- Roe,  E.  1991.  Development  Narratives,  or  Making the Best of Blueprint Development. World Development 19:287-300.
- Sangare,  Sita.  1995.  Interviews,  July  3,  August  13, Katiali.
- Schroeder, R. 1999. Community, Forestry and Conditionality in The Gambia. Africa 69: 1-22.
- Silue, Dognimé. 1995. Interview, July 29, Katiali.
- Skarpe, C. 1991. Impact of Grazing in Savanna Ecosystems. Ambio 20(8):351-56.
- Société d'Etudes de Développement Economique et Sociale  (SEDES).  1965. Région  de  Korhogo. Etude de développement socio-économique , vol. 3. Rapport Agricole. Paris: SEDES.
- Sprugel, D. G. 1991. Disturbance, Equilibrium, and Environmental  Variability.  What  Is  'Natural' Vegetation in a Changing Environment? Biological Conservation 58:1-18.
- Stamp, L. D. 1940. The Southern Margin of the Sahara:  Comments  on  Some  Recent  Studies  on the Question of Dessication in West Africa. The Geographical Review 30:297-300.
- Stebbing, E. P. 1935. The Encroaching Sahara: The Threat to the West African Colonies. Geographical Journal 85(5):506-24.
- Stocking, M. 1987. Measuring Land Degradation. In Land Degradation and Society , ed. P . Blaikie and H. Brookfield, pp. 49-63. London: Methuen.
- ---. 1996. Soil Erosion: Breaking New Ground. In The Lie of the Land: Challenging Received Wisdom on the African Environment ,  ed.  M.  Leach and  R.  Mearns,  pp.  140-54.  Oxford,  U.K.

- and Portsmouth,  NH:  James  Currey,  Ltd.  and Heinemann.
- Swift, J. 1996. Desertification: Narratives, Winners &amp; Losers.  In The Lie of the Land: Challenging Received Wisdom on the African Environment , ed. M. Leach and R. Mearns, pp. 73-90. Oxford, U.K. and  Portsmouth,  NH:  James  Currey,  Ltd.  and Heinemann.
- 360 millions pour équiper le Comité de lutte. 1998. Bulletin  d'Information  et  de  Sensibilisation  Environnementale 2:13.
- Tiffen,  M.;  Mortimore,  M.;  and  Gichuki,  F.  1994. More People, Less Erosion: Environmental Recovery in Kenya. Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley and Sons.
- Tuo, Songuofolo. 1995. Interview, July 21, Katiali.
- Turner, M. 1993. Overstocking the Range: A Critical Analysis of the Environmental Science of Sahelian  Pastoralism. Economic  Geography 69:40221.
- ---. 1999. Merging Local and Regional Analyses of Land-Use Change: The Case of Livestock in the Sahel. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 89:191-219.
- Warren, A. 1996. Desertification. In The Physical Geography  of  Africa ,  ed.  W.  M.  Adams,  A.  S.
- Goudie, and A. R. Orme, pp. 342-55. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- Watts,  M.  1987.  Drought,  Environment,  and  Food Security: Some Reflections on Peasants, Pastoralists, and Commoditization in Dryland W. Africa.  In Drought and Hunger in Africa: Denying Famine  a  Future, ed.  M.  Glantz,  pp.  149-62. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
- Westoby, M.; Walker, B.; and Noy-Meir, I. 1989. Opportunistic Management for Rangelands not at Equilibrium. Journal  of  Range  Management 42: 266-74.
- Williams, G. 1995. Modernizing Malthus: The World Bank,  Population  Control  and  the  African Environment.  In Power  of  Development ,  ed. J. Crush, pp. 158-75. London: Routledge.
- World Bank. 1992. World Development Report 1992. Washington: World Bank.
- ---. 1994. Côte d'Ivoire: vers un développement durable , Rapport No 13821-IVC.
- ---. 1998. Interview with World Bank Official, June 23, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
- Zimmerer, K. 1996. Changing Fortunes: Biodiversity and Peasant Livelihood in the Peruvian Andes. Los Angeles and Berkeley: University of California Press.

Correspondence: Department  of  Geography,  University  of  Illinois  at  Urbana-Champaign,  Urbana,  IL  61801, email bassett@uiuc.edu (Bassett); Institut de Géographie Tropicale, Université de Cocody, Abidjan 22 B.P. 1274, Côte d'Ivoire (Koli Bi).