This article was downloaded by: [Tufts University]

On: 27 October 2014, At: 11:42

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## The Amenity Principle, Internal Migration, and Rural Development in Australia

Neil Argent a , Matthew Tonts b , Roy Jones c &amp; John Holmes d

- a Division of Geography and Planning , University of New England

b School of Earth and Environment , University of Western Australia

c School of Built Environment , Curtin University

d School of Geography, Planning and Environmental Management , University of Queensland Published online: 20 Feb 2014.

To cite this article: Neil Argent , Matthew Tonts , Roy Jones &amp; John Holmes (2014) The Amenity Principle, Internal Migration, and Rural Development in Australia, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 104:2, 305-318, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2013.873320

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2013.873320

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## The Amenity Principle, Internal Migration, and Rural Development in Australia

Neil Argent, ∗ Matthew Tonts, † Roy Jones, ‡ and John Holmes §

∗ Division of Geography and Planning, University of New England † School of Earth and Environment, University of Western Australia ‡ School of Built Environment, Curtin University

§ School of Geography, Planning and Environmental Management, University of Queensland

Arguably, rural land markets in Australia are currently in a high state of flux, with a panoply of competing interests seeking to capitalize on both the traditional and a range of newly emergent values anchored in land. Amenity-led migration is, we argue, an important strand of this renewed interest in rural lands, albeit one that is highly spatially selective. Employing a predictive and synoptic model of migration attractiveness across southeastern and southwestern Australia, we test its associations with migration currents into and out of rural communities for the 1990s and 2000s. This article finds that communities with high relative accessibility-to metropolitan and urban centers and the coast-and an established or emerging tourism industry have been most likely to experience net migration gains. Yet amenity migration also intersects with more traditional rural land uses and, in particular, irrigated agriculture. Farming, and the biophysical environment and cultural landscape it both draws on and produces, is an important attractor of amenity migration. Key Words: Australia, counterurbanization, rural amenity, rural migration.

/ZdZ9439 /ZdZ3667 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ966 /ZdZ5247 /ZdZ1913 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ3147/ZdZ3164 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ3174 , /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ1041 /ZdZ16672 /ZdZ8335 /ZdZ3632 /ZdZ954/ZdZ825 /ZdZ6873 /ZdZ2308 /ZdZ2004 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ10210 /ZdZ5421 , /ZdZ2352 /ZdZ12025 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ958 /ZdZ12298 /ZdZ949 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ4319 /ZdZ1695 /ZdZ1262 , /ZdZ8335 /ZdZ1069 /ZdZ3114 /ZdZ2360 /ZdZ6946 /ZdZ1018 /ZdZ7525 /ZdZ7737 /ZdZ954 /ZdZ3147/ZdZ3164 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1100 /ZdZ13323 /ZdZ1059 /ZdZ1384 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ2352 /ZdZ12025 /ZdZ6876 /ZdZ1696 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1059 /ZdZ1384 /ZdZ857 /ZdZ14563 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ5949 /ZdZ1048/ZdZ871 /ZdZ5196 , /ZdZ17705 /ZdZ8558 /ZdZ14142 /ZdZ17710 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 , /ZdZ7003 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ3147/ZdZ3164 /ZdZ6876 /ZdZ1696/ZdZ1696 /ZdZ17103 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ812/ZdZ854 /ZdZ18169 /ZdZ16045 /ZdZ7344 /ZdZ5948 , /ZdZ1138 /ZdZ8336 /ZdZ12711 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ2208 /ZdZ907 /ZdZ1699 /ZdZ7221 /ZdZ20484 /ZdZ5074 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ12198 /ZdZ19232 /ZdZ17717 /ZdZ6165 /ZdZ5459 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ5949 /ZdZ1048 /ZdZ4402 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ2404 /ZdZ5185 /ZdZ1991 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ19888 /ZdZ8823 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ7854 /ZdZ16045 /ZdZ8013 /ZdZ3255 /ZdZ17660 /ZdZ10836 /ZdZ14111 /ZdZ9439 /ZdZ3667 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ966 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ840 /ZdZ2179/ZdZ2294 /ZdZ16043 /ZdZ2179 /ZdZ17940 , /ZdZ8823 /ZdZ16641 /ZdZ3156 1990 /ZdZ826 2000 /ZdZ5024 /ZdZ1039/ZdZ857 , /ZdZ1698 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ1830 /ZdZ2488 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ1681/ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ11882 /ZdZ2150 /ZdZ17079 /ZdZ2027 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1695 /ZdZ13696 /ZdZ5459 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ7256 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ10460 , /ZdZ17161 /ZdZ12007 /ZdZ3667 /ZdZ17961 /ZdZ1094 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ857 /ZdZ5359 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ8867 /ZdZ4580 /ZdZ1699 /ZdZ7221 /ZdZ20484 /ZdZ5074 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ4389 /ZdZ2331/ZdZ2294 /ZdZ5459 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ11882 /ZdZ2150 , /ZdZ1041 /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ6897 /ZdZ9060 /ZdZ838 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ4481 /ZdZ4280 /ZdZ3635 /ZdZ5954 /ZdZ8335 /ZdZ3156 /ZdZ2301 /ZdZ4481 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ11882 /ZdZ2150 , /ZdZ7212/ZdZ7221 /ZdZ2331 /ZdZ13865 /ZdZ13307 /ZdZ2226 /ZdZ998 /ZdZ2319 /ZdZ8980 /ZdZ3530 /ZdZ19115 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1138 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ978 /ZdZ2360 /ZdZ6946 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ7200 /ZdZ870 /ZdZ1100 /ZdZ13323 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ3147/ZdZ3164 /ZdZ1195 /ZdZ10836 , /ZdZ10149 /ZdZ1879 /ZdZ7003 /ZdZ9592 /ZdZ9141 /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ838 /ZdZ11300 /ZdZ958/ZdZ976 /ZdZ19013 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ13633 /ZdZ12025 , /ZdZ2294 /ZdZ1698 /ZdZ2360 /ZdZ6946 /ZdZ1052 /ZdZ17026 /ZdZ5026 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ979 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ10827 /ZdZ10133/ZdZ10133 /ZdZ10546 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ826 /ZdZ6835 /ZdZ2114 /ZdZ7067 /ZdZ16110 , /ZdZ7003 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ11184 /ZdZ18169 /ZdZ16045 /ZdZ2404 /ZdZ5185 /ZdZ3084 /ZdZ12876 /ZdZ544 /ZdZ1695 /ZdZ19034 /ZdZ16633 : /ZdZ9439 /ZdZ3667 /ZdZ1877 /ZdZ966 , /ZdZ2297 /ZdZ3322 /ZdZ4910 /ZdZ2114 , /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ10459 /ZdZ3503 , /ZdZ1736 /ZdZ7293 /ZdZ12071 /ZdZ8509 /ZdZ544

Es evidente que los mercados de la tierra en el ´ ambito rural de Australia se encuentran actualmente en un estado de alto flujo, con un abanico de intereses en competencia que buscan capitalizar tanto en los valores tradicionales apegados a la tierra, como en una gama de valores emergentes de reciente data. Nuestro argumento sostiene que la migraci´ on impulsada por la disponibilidad de equipamientos es un importante elemento explicativo de este renovado inter´ es por las tierras rurales, si bien es algo altamente selectivo desde el punto de vista espacial. Con el uso de un modelo predictivo y sin´ optico sobre atracci´ on migratoria a lo ancho del sudeste y sudoeste de Australia, analizamos sus asociaciones con las corrientes migratorias actuales hacia y afuera de las comunidades rurales durante los decenios de los 1990 y 2000. Este art´ ıculo revela que las comunidades dotadas de alta accesibilidad relativa-a centros metropolitanos y urbanos y a la costa -y de una industria tur´ ıstica ya establecida o emergente, muy probablemente experimentan netas ganancias migratorias. Sin embargo, la migraci´ on en busca de comodidades tambi´ en intersecta con usos del suelo m´ as tradicionales y, en particular, con la agricultura basada en riego. La agricultura-y el medio ambiente biof´ ısico y el paisaje cultural, de los cuales depende y a la vez transforma y construye-es un importante factor atrayente de la migraci´ on impulsada por disponibilidad de equipamientos. Palabras clave: Australia, contra-urbanizaci´ on, equipamientos rurales, migraci´ on rural.

M uchoftherapidlyexpanding literature on rural amenity and amenity-led migration has reached a broad consensus on two important points. First, in high-amenity rural areas, largescale commercial agriculture's long-term future appears doomed, caught in a powerful pincer movement between, on one side, cashed-up ex-urban migrants bidding up the price of scenically attractive farmland and, on the other, local governments happy to accommodate this demand to generate lucrative income streams from

local taxes, growing populations, and a range of development and regulatory levies, thereby guaranteeing their own long-term financial viability (Smith and Krannich 2000). The second point of broad agreement centers on which population subgroups make up these in-flows. Overwhelmingly, these are seen to be ex-urban wealthy and upper middle-class households, seeking to pursue comfortable lifestyles in idyllic landscapes, effectively gentrifying the countryside (Curry, Koczberski, and Selwood 2001; Larsen et al. 2007; Nelson and Nelson 2010; Gosnell and Abrams 2011). A third point gaining purchase in the international literature is, however, the recognition of the independent influence that a suite of biophysical, economic, and locational attributes of rural place is playing in drawing migrants into select locales (McGranahan 1999; Deller et al. 2001; Hunter, Boardman, and Saint Onge 2004; Argent, Smailes, and Griffin 2007).

In this article, we explore the complex temporal and spatial dimensions of post-1990s migration into and out of nonmetropolitan areas of southeastern and southwestern Australia through the lens of rural amenity. The remainder of the article is structured as follows. The next section briefly but critically reviews the rural amenity migration literature as it pertains to postindustrial nations. The third major section tests the relationships between amenity and recent internal migration trends across the study area. The results are discussed in the fourth section, followed by the conclusions.

## Amenity-Led Migration into Rural Areas: A Review

Rural amenity is a quality relating to two aspects of a locale: (1) the relative attractiveness of the general environment in which it is set and (2) more specifically, the qualities or facilities of the locale itself. The first of these is a locational attribute, the latter a site attribute, and both are likely to influence where people choose to spend time (Argent, Smailes, and Griffin 2007). As a component of internal migration (i.e., permanent population movement within national boundaries), amenity-led migration to favored rural areas is frequently considered as a key subset of counterurbanization. In the Australian academic press and popular media, this conflation is achieved through the evocative labels of 'sea change' (for coastal counterurbanization flows) and 'tree change' (for more inland counterurbanization destinations; Burnley and Murphy 2004; Costello 2007). Together, these labels conjure up an implicit set of environmental, locational, eco- nomic, and sociocultural variables that act as vital pull factors for this migration current, regardless of its participants' origins (see Burnley and Murphy 2004; Hugo 2005; Walmsley et al. 2006). This we term the amenity principle.

Despite some recent valuable contributions to the literature concerning the motivations of counterurbanization migrants (Walmsley, Epps, and Duncan 1998; Smailes 2002; Burnley and Murphy 2004), there has been little concerted effort to specify the ensemble of environmental attributes that comprise rural amenity and the ways in which these attributes interact with ex-urban migrants' locational decision-making processes. Nevertheless, a number of papers concerned with rural population growth and regional economic development in North America have shed light on this issue (McGranahan 1999; Deller et al. 2001; Hunter, Boardman, and Saint Onge 2004).

In a pioneering study, McGranahan (1999) measured rural amenity using an index that incorporated three seasonal climatic variables (warm winter, winter sun, and summer humidity), a single topographic variable, and a surface water indicator, together with a proxy accessibility or remoteness variable. Detailed analysis of this index revealed that the individual climate attributes achieved the highest correlation coefficients, suggesting that the index was better able to predict winter migration than other types of population movement. Deller et al. (2001) adopted a very similar approach, using a composite range of climatic variables, a surface water resource indicator, a land resource indicator (percentage of land in wilderness, forest, farms, and state parks), a composite winter recreation variable, and a recreational facilities indicator. This allowed them to identify high- and low-amenity rural regions and the relationships among amenity, population growth, and income. Hunter, Boardman, and Saint Onge (2004) similarly developed a composite amenity scale, incorporating measures of climate, topography, and water area, in their quest to establish whether or not high-amenity zones tended to experience higher levels of in-migration, gentrification, or both. More recently, rural amenity-focused migration research in the United States has extended into critiques of Florida's city-centric, creative class thesis (McGranahan and Wojan 2007; Wojan, Lambert, and McGranahan 2007; McGranahan, Wojan, and Lambert 2011).

In Australia, Barr (2002, 2005, 2009) has assessed the increasingly critical role of amenity values in shaping rural landscapes and thereby rural societies and economies. Of particular value is his depiction of the 'rural amenity landscape,' which is largely directed

toward an examination of the pivotal role of what he terms an amenity premium in entrenching the presence and retention of undersized farms, facilitating and even enforcing pluriactivity (i.e., the creation of additional on-farm-but often nonagricultural-or off-farm income streams) and part-time farming. In his Australiawide study, Barr (2005) noted that farm incomes are generally lower in amenity landscapes than in highproduction zones but that farm family incomes are higher in the former areas because, in such areas, they are tied to a higher component of (earned or unearned) off-farm (or nonagricultural on-farm) income. Furthermore, the rate of decline of farmer numbers in these high-amenity areas is lower than that in the agricultural heartland. In contrasting these two landscapes, Barr (2005, 68) commented that 'a consolidation of the division of rural Australia into high amenity and low amenity locations' seems to be occurring. He further suggested that the demand for landscape amenity is having a significant impact on the geography of structural change in Australian agriculture and therefore on rural Australia in more general terms. The influence of amenity is 'manifest in the high price of land in the more amenable and accessible parts of the rural landscape. These higher land prices restrict the capacity of agriculture to adjust to and maintain competitiveness and inexorably drive the path of adjustment to a noncommercial agricultural future' (Barr 2002, 107).

For Holmes (2006), too, consumption-based values meet amenity landscapes head-on in Australia's multifunctional countryside. His detailed conceptualization, and regionalization, of the 'multifunctional rural transition' revolves around seven 'modes of occupance,' including an amenity mode (Holmes 2006, 143). This is confined mainly to the metropolitan and regional city fringes, together with prime tourism locations. Echoing Barr, this mode's land use trajectories are governed by the capacity of consumption-related interests to easily outbid commercial farmers in the competition for land. Smailes, Griffin, and Argent (2005) also found rural amenity to exert a powerful influence over the growing heterogeneity of rural communities, especially those in the mixed agricultural and coastal zones. In particular, high rural amenity was strongly and positively correlated with recent in-migration, total population growth, industrial diversity, and aging populations and strongly negatively correlated with younger age structures and agriculture's proportional share of the local workforce.

This literature review suggests a number of topics that warrant further research. First, in the Australian context, what complex of place-based attributes best encapsulates the notion of rural amenity? Second, what is the nature of the association, if any, between rural amenity and in-, out-, and net migration trends and processes over the past decade or so? Finally, to what extent is the development of an 'amenity mode of occupance' (Holmes 2006, 143) threatening commercial farming in Australia's agricultural heartlands? The remainder of this article seeks to address these questions.

## Amenity and Internal Migration in Australia

Extending this research, Argent, Smailes, and Griffin (2007) developed an amenity index for local areas of nonmetropolitan southeastern Australia. This index included a number of environmental, locational, and socioeconomic variables, including annual rainfall, terrain and altitude, remoteness, duration of settlement, irrigation water resources, distance from a beach, and employment in recreation and related services (Table 1). For a detailed discussion and rationale for the use of these indicators, see Argent, Smailes, and Griffin (2007). This set of physical and social environmental attributes was argued to capture the essence of rural amenity and overlaps strongly with the complex of attributes that also make areas attractive for natural-resource-dependent industries, including farming. Consequently, as new, consumption-oriented interests interpret and value these attributes in different ways from established production-oriented land users, resource conflict can ensue, and land prices are bid up, leading to pressure for displacement of the latter by the former. The research demonstrated that, for southeastern Australia, there was a relatively strong statistical association between amenity and in-migration, the model achieving an r 2 of 0.53 for the 1996 to 2001 intercensal period (Argent, Smailes, and Griffin 2007, 229). For the analysis in this article, the index has been expanded to incorporate southwestern Australia, with Figure 1 showing the distribution of amenity across 479 social catchments in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, and Western Australia. Smailes et al. (2002) detailed the rationale for, and method of, designing bespoke spatial units. (Basically, each one centers on a significant country town with a surrounding area corresponding as closely as possible to its immediate social catchment, with overlaps split along median lines to give a full but mutually exclusive coverage of the study area.) Census collection district units were then allocated to these catchments for the 1981, 1996, 2001, and 2006 censuses, using a

Table 1. Amenity index indicators

| Indicator                                                                    | Source                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Median altitude range (m above sea level)                                    | The terrain variable used in this analysis was compiled using a digital elevation model (DEM) applied to a 1-km graticule of the Australian continent.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Median slope (%) a                                                           | As for median altitude range.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Median annual rainfall (mm)                                                  | Average of records available from local recording stations. The vast majority of community centers possess records reaching back over 100 years. Data available from the Australian Bureau of Meteorology Web site (http://www.bom.gov.au).                                                                                                 |
| Settlement duration (years)                                                  | Calculated as the period since the date of proclamation (or, in some cases, survey) of the community's principal town.                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Accessibility                                                                | Derived from the Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia (ARIA-plus 1996 version; Department of Health and Aged Care and the National Key Centre for Social Applications of Geographical Information Systems 1999). As a high ARIA-plus score indicates a high degree of remoteness, all scores were multiplied by -1 prior to testing. |
| Irrigation water resources (% farm income from irrigation)                   | The proportion of a community's total value of agricultural produce attributable to irrigation, calculated from the Australian Bureau of Statistics Agricultural Census for 2001.                                                                                                                                                           |
| Beach proximity (km)                                                         | Calculated road distances between a rural community's main town and the nearest beach or coastal center. All scores multiplied by -1 prior to testing.                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Employment in tourism and related services employment (% of total workforce) | Proportion of the 2001 workforce employed in the accommodation, cultural, and personal services industrial category for each community.                                                                                                                                                                                                     |

a Median slope is a percentage-of-slope value derived by the Zevenbergen and Thorne Method, using a 3 × 3 window (Burrough and McDonnell 1998, 190).

concordance. The dependent variables are drawn from cross-classified tables of usual place of residence at Census night and five years prior for the 1996, 2001, and 2006 Censuses (Australian Bureau of Statistics 2008).

These same spatial units were also used to map net migration rates across the southern parts of rural Australia (Figure 2). This reveals a distinctive pattern, with many of the nation's inland, broad-acre agricultural regions experiencing net migration losses. This reflects long-standing processes of adjustment in Australian agriculture, with farm amalgamation and expansion contributing to the out-migration of farm families, the contraction of local economies, and the loss of jobs and people from rural service industries in what Sorensen (1990) has described as a vicious cycle of decline. In contrast, many of the nation's coastal and periurban areas have experienced net in-migration. Yet, the pattern is complex. Some coastal and periurban areas have seen losses, whereas in a number of cases more remote inland areas have experienced net migration gains. So, whereas a broad-scale analysis permits starkly dichotomous regional categorizations of migration patterns into, for example, a declining dry inland versus a booming, well-watered coastal and periurban zone, a more scalar-sensitive approach better captures the geographical complexity of contemporary demographic change in rural Australia (Smailes, Griffin, and Argent 2005).

Table 2 shows the relationships between the amenity index and in-, out-, and net migration rates. It shows that, for the intercensal periods from 1991 to 1996, 1996 to 2001, and 2001 to 2006, the coefficients for in-migration are less stable and overwhelmingly lower than for the other migration measures. To a substantial degree this can be attributed to the nature of the dependent variable itself. In-migration rates might be regarded as a reasonably reliable indicator of the attractiveness and general utility of a place, but many Australian places characterized by relatively high inmigration are also places of high population turnover, especially more remote centers that host mineral and resources extraction. Given the hypothesized positive relationship between the amenity index and inmigration, the consistent moderately negative correlations between the amenity index and out-migration

Figure 1. Rural amenity, southeastern and southwestern Australia. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 2. Net migration rates, southeastern and southwestern Australia, 2001-2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Table 2. Correlation coefficients (Pearson's r ) between the amenity index and net in- and out-migration rates

|               | Net migration rate   | Net migration rate   | Net migration rate   | In-migration rate   | In-migration rate   | In-migration rate   | Out-migration rate   | Out-migration rate   | Out-migration rate   |
|---------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|---------------------|---------------------|---------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
|               | 1991-1996            | 1996-2001            | 2001-2006            | 1991-1996           | 1996-2001           | 2001-2006           | 1991-1996            | 1996-2001            | 2001-2006            |
| Amenity index | 0 . 57 ∗             | 0 . 58 ∗             | 0 . 64 ∗             | 0 . 29 ∗            | -0 . 14 ∗           | 0 . 32 ∗            | - 0 . 37 ∗           | - 0 . 32 ∗           | - 0 . 43 ∗           |

∗ Correlation is significant at the 0.001 level.

provide some confirmation of the applicability of the amenity model. People, however, are attracted to and driven from new rural destinations for a plethora of reasons and, therefore, we argue that a better proxy for the authentic attractiveness of a rural locale is net migration. The amenity index is a good predictor of net migration, with coefficients ranging between 0.57 and 0.64 over the period. Moreover, the evidence suggests that amenity has become an increasingly important component of rural migration patterns in recent decades. Net migration gain is at least to some extent an expression of the new settlers' commitment to and satisfaction with their new locales, whereas the obverse is true for areas experiencing net migration loss.

Table 3 provides a finer grained analysis of the relationship between rural amenity and migration. Those communities with the highest net migration gains almost all have relatively high amenity scores. These are generally located in perimetropolitan or coastal locations and in many cases have a long history of tourism and related activities. The sole exception here is Ravensthorpe in Western Australia, which gained migrants largely due to a major new nickel mine development during the late 2000s (subsequently closed in 2009). Those communities that experienced the greatest net migration losses all had low amenity scores and were typically located in areas dominated by extensive agriculture.

This synoptic mapping of rural amenity, and the exploration of its relationships with migration processes, provides insights into the spatial coincidence of the causal environmental, locational, economic, and cultural factors on the one hand and rural migration hot and cold spots on the other. In addition, it provides some much needed empirical validation of the inevitably spatially uneven development of the multifunctional countryside in Australia, especially in relation to Holmes's (2006) amenity mode of occupance. Employing the index in this aggregated fashion obscures, however, an understanding of the ways in which more specific elements of amenity are shaping migra- tion patterns. A more robust test of the index and its explanatory capabilities therefore lies in multiple regression analysis.

Tables 4 and 5 explore the relationship between amenity and in- and out-migration flows into nonmetropolitan southeastern and Western Australia during the 1990s and early 2000s. Tables 4, 5, and 6 give results for both the full model with all variables included and a final backward elimination model. Table 4 shows that there is, overall, a relatively weak and unstable relationship between amenity and in-migration. Four of the eight variables that make up the amenity index were eliminated during model testing with the duration of European settlement and median annual rainfall discarded for every intercensal period. In a country

Table 3. Highest ten net migration gains and losses, 2001-2006

| Community                | Net migration rates, 2001-2006   | Amenity index   |
|--------------------------|----------------------------------|-----------------|
| Capel (WA)               | 317 . 42                         | 2 . 24          |
| Lorne (Vic.)             | 160 . 94                         | 9 . 99          |
| Kapunda (SA)             | 135 . 48                         | 1 . 94          |
| Goolwa (SA)              | 135 . 21                         | 3 . 16          |
| Broadford (Vic.)         | 127 . 46                         | 2 . 09          |
| Kilmore (Vic.)           | 127 . 46                         | 2 . 99          |
| Wallan (Vic.)            | 127 . 46                         | 1 . 99          |
| Wandong-Heathcote (Vic.) | 127 . 46                         | 2 . 36          |
| Ravensthorpe (WA)        | 127 . 11                         | -7 . 45         |
| Anglesea (Vic.)          | 124 . 35                         | 3 . 90          |
| Perenjori (WA)           | -144 . 80                        | -9 . 22         |
| Dowerin (WA)             | -155 . 13                        | -6 . 53         |
| Carnamah (WA)            | -158 . 82                        | -7 . 16         |
| Dumbleyung (WA)          | -175 . 29                        | -7 . 95         |
| Koorda (WA)              | -178 . 82                        | -9 . 34         |
| Mukinbudin (WA)          | -186 . 32                        | -10 . 27        |
| Southern Cross (WA)      | -187 . 31                        | -9 . 21         |
| Gnowerangerup (WA)       | -188 . 69                        | -6 . 50         |
| Dalwallinu (WA)          | -190 . 53                        | -9 . 01         |
| Mingenew (WA)            | -218 . 11                        | -6 . 18         |

Note: WA = Western Australia; Vic. = Victoria; SA = Southern Australia. Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics (2008).

Table 4. Results of full and backwards linear regression analysis, amenity index, and in-migration, 1991-1996, 1996-2001, and 2001-2006

|                            | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   |
|----------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                            | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       |
| Irrigation water resources | 11 . 29           | 11 . 28           | 7 . 28            | 7 . 86            | 4 . 62            | 4 . 71            |
| Settlement duration        | -1 . 94           | (x)               | . 94              | (x)               | 2 . 49            | (x)               |
| Beach proximity            | 20 . 03           | 19 . 57           | 16 . 30           | 17 . 00           | 16 . 15           | 15 . 9            |
| Tourism workforce          | 9 . 68            | 9 . 32            | 6 . 94            | 7 . 42            | 3 . 84            | (x)               |
| Median slope               | 11 . 67           | 11 . 36           | 12 . 90           | 13 . 45           | 9 . 56            | 8 . 81            |
| Median annual rainfall     | -2 . 46           | (x)               | 2 . 71            | (x)               | -3 . 46           | (x)               |
| Median altitude range      | -14 . 82          | - 15 . 38         | -11 . 19          | - 10 . 78         | -8 . 12           | - 7 . 29          |
| Accessibility              | 2 . 36            | (x)               | 5 . 98            | 6 . 83            | 8 . 38            | 8 . 85            |
| Model summary              |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| R                          | 0 . 44            | 0 . 44            | 0 . 46            | 0 . 46            | 0 . 41            | 0 . 40            |
| R 2                        | 0 . 19            | 0 . 19            | 0 . 21            | 0 . 21            | 0 . 17            | 0 . 16            |
| F                          | 14 . 35 ∗         | 22 . 89 ∗         | 15 . 93 ∗         | 21 . 19 ∗         | 12 . 08 ∗         | 18 . 51 ∗         |

Note: (x) = variable removed in backward elimination linear regression testing. The variables yielding the largest, statistically significant coefficients, following the elimination of non-influential variables, have been highlighted in bold. ∗ p &lt; 0.001.

world-renowned for its aridity, the last-mentioned result is perhaps surprising until it is recognized that the dry inland zones through which some of Australia's major rivers flow are key internal migration destination zones, including for counterurbanization migrants (Burnley and Murphy 2004). This also helps to explain the reasonably strong contribution that the irrigation water resources variable plays in the model for all three intercensal periods.

Given the equally legendary pull of the beach in contemporary Australian society and culture (Drewe 1983; Salt 2001), the beach proximity variable plays a predictably strong role in the model. More surprising, is the substantial although dwindling explanatory power of the two terrain variables-median slope and altitude range. Combined, these indicators suggest that (1) flat, featureless landscapes of the kind typically found in the inland broad-acre cropping and farming belt

Table 5. Results of full and backward linear regression analysis, amenity index, and out-migration, 1991-1996, 1996-2001, and 2001-2006

|                            | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   |
|----------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                            | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       |
| Irrigation water resources | -3 . 84           | (x)               | -6 . 0            | -6 . 13           | -6 . 1            | -6 . 38           |
| Settlement duration        | -2 . 96           | (x)               | -1 . 41           | (x)               | -2 . 49           | (x)               |
| Beach proximity            | 6 . 64            | 7 . 37            | -1 . 52           | (x)               | 4 . 08            | 3 . 92            |
| Tourism workforce          | - 8 . 53          | - 9 . 10          | -11 . 58          | - 12 . 41         | -9 . 77           | - 9 . 89          |
| Median slope               | 11 . 67           | 12 . 66           | 12 . 65           | 11 . 77           | 13 . 54           | 14 . 05           |
| Median annual rainfall     | -16 . 01          | - 16 . 47         | -2 . 45           | (x)               | -4 . 79           | -4 . 39           |
| Median altitude range      | -3 . 97           | -4 . 80           | -4 . 46           | -4 . 97           | -10 . 83          | - 11 . 73         |
| Accessibility              | -10 . 46          | - 13 . 43         | -10 . 18          | - 11 . 57         | -13 . 12          | - 14 . 06         |
| Model summary              |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| R                          | 0 . 49            | 0 . 49            | 0 . 44            | 0 . 44            | 0 . 58            | 0 . 58            |
| R 2                        | 0 . 24            | 0 . 24            | 0 . 19            | 0 . 19            | 0 . 33            | 0 . 33            |
| F                          | 19 . 18 ∗         | 24 . 87 ∗         | 13 . 47 ∗         | 22 . 69 ∗         | 30 . 09 ∗         | 34 . 14 ∗         |

Note: (x) = variable removed in backward elimination linear regression testing. The variables yielding the largest, statistically significant coefficients, following the elimination of non-influential variables, have been highlighted in bold.

∗ p &lt; 0.001.

Table 6. Results of full and backward linear regression analysis, amenity index, and net migration change, 1991-1996, 1996-2001, and 2001-2006

|                            | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1991-1996 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 1996-2001 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   | 2001-2006 ( β )   |
|----------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                            | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       | Full model        | Final model       |
| Irrigation water resources | 14 . 48           | 14 . 90           | 18 . 98           | 20 . 14           | 11 . 08           | 11 . 32           |
| Settlement duration        | 3 . 33            | (x)               | 4 . 34            | (x)               | 5 . 91            | 6 . 42            |
| Beach proximity            | 13 . 09           | 13 . 26           | 21 . 36           | 21 . 40           | 13 . 21           | 12 . 90           |
| Tourism workforce          | 17 . 85           | 17 . 90           | 17 . 12           | 17 . 80           | 13 . 10           | 13 . 10           |
| Median slope               | . 10              | (x)               | - . 80            | (x)               | -3 . 91           | (x)               |
| Median annual rainfall     | 13 . 82           | 13 . 13           | 4 . 25            | (x)               | . 10              | (x)               |
| Median altitude            | -10 . 94          | - 10 . 03         | -7 . 01           | - 5 . 70          | 1 . 89            | (x)               |
| Accessibility              | 11 . 48           | 12 . 79           | 16 . 53           | 18 . 88           | 20 . 78           | 20 . 95           |
| Model summary              |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |                   |
| R                          | 0 . 64            | 0 . 64            | 0 . 64            | 0 . 64            | 0 . 69            | 0 . 69            |
| R 2                        | 0 . 42            | 0 . 41            | 0 . 41            | 0 . 41            | 0 . 48            | 0 . 48            |
| F                          | 42 . 54 ∗         | 56 . 57 ∗         | 41 . 78 ∗         | 66 . 29 ∗         | 54 . 91 ∗         | 87 . 62 ∗         |

Note: (x) = variable removed in backward elimination linear regression testing. The variables yielding the largest, statistically significant coefficients, following the elimination of non-influential variables, have been highlighted in bold.

∗ p &lt; 0.001.

discourages in-migration, whereas more varied local relief has a positive effect on it; and (2) conversely, very rugged landscapes, such as mountain ranges, also militate against in-migration, whether for farming or the pursuit of amenity.

Another interesting feature of Table 4 is the growing influence of accessibility over in-migration rates. Eliminated from the model for the 1991 to 1996 intercensal period, it was the second most influential indicator in 2001 to 2006. Also of interest is the dramatically declining explanatory power of the tourism and related services employment indicator. In many respects, this variable sits at the core of the amenity index, serving to encapsulate a place's draw on both temporary visitors and permanent residents in search of recreational, artistic, and cultural pursuits.

Table 5 displays the results of the testing of the amenity model against out-migration rates for the same area and the same periods as for Table 4. This shows generally stronger relationships between amenity and out-migration for the entire model and for many of the individual variables. For the final intercensal period-2001 to 2006-the amenity model explained one third of the variance in out-migration rates across what is, by any definition, a vast and highly internally heterogeneous area. There are other notable points of contrast between Tables 4 and 5. Key among these is the very minor influence that beach proximity has over out-migration flows. Also, the tourism and related services employment indicator exerts a consistently strong influence (and in the direction hypothesized) over outmigration rates. As with Table 4, though, the terrain variables and accessibility are consistently powerful predictors and are increasing in strength over time. The results for the terrain variables, however, are a little difficult to interpret. Regressed against out-migration rates, the results suggest that communities with undulating local relief experience high out-migration, whereas those areas containing the most rugged land forms (e.g., mountain ranges excised by deep river valleys) experience the lowest out-migration rates. Obviously, these results conflict with the findings presented in Table 4. The results for accessibility, in contrast, accord with a commonsense understanding of the Australian space economy. As in Table 4, settlement duration and median annual rainfall are relatively weak indicators, although rainfall was a very powerful predictor of out-migration rates for the period from 1991 to 1996.

Table 6 provides the results of a multiple regression analysis that disaggregates each of the indicators of the amenity index as independent variables and uses net migration rates for the respective intercensal periods as the dependent variables. As noted earlier, net migration is a more statistically stable and conceptually reliable measure of place attractiveness than in-migration rates and is therefore preferred for this round of testing. The results emphasize the fitness for purpose of the amenity index, which explains more than 40 percent of the variance in the first two intercensal periods, rising to just under 50 percent for the period from 2001 to 2006.

The modeling shows that only a few of the independent amenity variables are consistently important in explaining net migration. Those that remained in the final model for all three census periods were the value of irrigated agriculture, beach proximity, tourism workforce, and remoteness. Altitude was important in the 1991 to 1996 and the 1996 to 2001 periods but was absent for 2001 to 2006, and rainfall was present in 1991 to 1996 but absent thereafter. The assumedly critical environmental variables median slope and annual rainfall were absent in all final models, and settlement duration was present only in 2001 to 2006.

In broad terms, access to the beach and local tourism potential had very good explanatory value, reflecting Australians' strong sense of attachment and attraction to the coast. Perhaps it also suggests that tourism centers are often likely to make the transition to places of more permanent settlement by the process of amenity-led migration. The consistent presence of irrigation water resources in the models reflects a landscape's attractiveness for both productivist agricultural uses and more inland-oriented amenity pursuits. Strangely, perhaps, median rainfall had only a weak and diminishing influence across the entire study period. This seemingly anomalous relationship could be attributed to the fact that migration decision making generally involves perceptions that encompass longer term trends in key environmental features, rather than year-to-year fluctuations in a single variable. Another important result relates to accessibility. When other variables are controlled for, accessibility is one of the major influences over the pattern of net migration. Those places relatively close to large metropolitan areas or urban centers typically experience the strongest net migration gains. Accessibility also appears to be becoming increasingly significant over time, largely as result of the extension of urban fields.

The relative robustness of the final regression models, in particular for 2001 to 2006, is evident in Figure 3, which maps the net migration residuals. This shows that, for large parts of rural southern Australia, the residuals are relatively small, indicating that the model is able to offer a good explanation for the geography of net migration rates. There are, however, a number of communities where the model tends to either overor underpredict net migration. This is particularly evident in Western Australia, where levels of net migration are higher than expected in a number of rural communities. Most evident here are Ravensthorpe and Esperance in the far eastern agricultural regions and parts of the coast north of the state capital,

Perth. In all of these areas, mining-led development has contributed substantially to the pattern of net migration. The periurban area around Perth also tends to have higher levels of net migration gain than would be expected, largely due to the outward expansion of one of Australia's fastest growing cities (Kennewell and Shaw 2008) and to the growing role of fly-in/fly-out work in the Western Australian labor force.

In eastern Australia, the residuals map is more complex. The model tends to underpredict net migration in some of the New South Wales irrigation areas, and particularly those along the Murray River bordering Victoria. Similarly, in the Yorke Peninsula of South Australia and parts of the Eyre Peninsula, rates of net migration gain are higher than expected. In the former case, in spite of their relatively high degree of remoteness, flat terrain, and low rainfall, the riverine landscapes of these areas have, for some time, lured in-migrants keen to enjoy the water views and recreation opportunities that the Murray River (and its many tributaries) offers but at a fraction of the cost of most beach real estate. In the latter case, the rugged coastal scenery, good beaches, and small country town atmosphere of the Yorke Peninsula has equally made it a favored location for holidays for generations but, with the expanding urban field of Adelaide, the South Australian capital, parts of the Peninsula have come to fall within the outer limits of the city's commuting belt, making it an increasingly attractive choice for occasional physical and telecommuters and retirees (Smailes 2002). The southern portion of the Eyre Peninsula offers similarly attractive natural environments within which to either consume the landscape or attempt to make a living from it, underscoring the double-edged character of the amenity index. Intensive aquaculture and agriculture ventures recently established on the Eyre Peninsula have drawn in interregional migrants. Lower than expected net migration gains were recorded in parts of northern New South Wales and around the Victorian and South Australian borders.

As previously discussed, rural amenity can be seen to overlap significantly with the physical characteristics necessary for primary production and natural resource extraction, including farming. Indeed, the farming landscapes, and the aesthetic they create, are critical in the production of rural amenity. Yet there is often a somewhat paradoxical process at work here, with this very attribute that contributes to in-migration being radically transformed as a result of this process. As new interests interpret and value these attributes in different, albeit, at times, highly conservative ways (Jones

Figure 3. Residuals from regression analysis of net migration rates, southeastern and southwestern Australia, 2001-2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

and Dolin 2012), resource conflict can ensue as land prices are bid up, leading to pressure for displacement, characteristically of production by consumption. These forces are encapsulated by Barr's notion of the 'amenity premium,' which is expressed here as the ratio of the market value of land to agricultural production value per unit area. Figure 4 displays the amenity premium for the study area using 2006 land sales and agricultural

Figure 4. The amenity premium, southeastern and southwestern Australia, 2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

commodity sales data. Generally speaking, there is a visually strong relationship between the amenity premium and accessibility, with high-amenity premium values occurring in the urban fringes of the capital cities and along the popular coastal belts on the west and east coasts of the continent. The correlation between the amenity index and the amenity premium is moderately positive (Pearson's r = 0.56, p &lt; 0.001), broadly confirming the association, although some surprising outliers can be found in the far north of South Australia and in the Wimmera region of Victoria. Consistent with the central tenets of the multifunctional countryside, the growing intrusion of amenity values into rural spaces does not appear to spell doom for agricultural production, with the amenity premium having no association with the value of agricultural production ( r = 0.07). Wewould suggest a number of possible reasons for this. The first is that, rather than agriculture being fully displaced, it is being restructured in ways that favor higher value production, though often on smaller parcels of land. Indeed, semicommercial (and even fully commercial) hobby or, perhaps more accurately, microfarms in high-value niche sectors such as viticulture, horticulture, and specialist livestock production have emerged in some of Australia's amenity environments. The second is the role of various policy instruments, including land use planning regulations and protective covenants designed to protect agricultural land, particularly in the urban fringe. Thus, agricultural activity often occurs alongside more intensive land uses. More broadly, however, we would suggest that further empirical work is required to better understand the relationships among amenity, land use, and agricultural production.

## Conclusion

As in many other places, amenity migration is reshaping the geography of settlement in much of rural Australia. Those areas that are relatively accessible to metropolitan and urban centers are close to the coast and, with an existing or emerging tourism industry, have been the most likely to experience net migration gains. Yet it is also apparent that amenity migration is intersecting with more traditional rural land uses and, in particular, irrigated agriculture. The evidence suggests that outcome is not simply one of rural gentrification but a more complex process consistent with a multifunctional rural transition and Holmes's (2006, 143) notion of an 'amenity mode of occupance.' This conceptualizes rural space as dominated by consumption values but does not preclude agricultural production. Indeed, in many respects, agricultural production, and the landscape it has produced and is producing, is an important part of what is being consumed by amenity migrants. Moreover, as Holmes (2006) pointed out, the interplay of consumption and production needs to also be understood in the context of protection. This is particularly evident in discourses related to the protection of agricultural lands, not just on the basis of their productive value but also in terms of the preservation of cultural landscapes. Collectively, of course, these changes are not simply reshaping rural land use but also the social, cultural, and political dynamics of rural areas. Indeed, there is evidence to suggest that the multifunctional transition that is occurring across much of rural Australia is contributing to growing levels of sociocultural, economic, and political heterogeneity. Although this article has pointed to some of the key drivers of this, further progress requires a new phase of empirically grounded research as a means of both improving our understanding of the processes underpinning amenity migration and rural change and our understanding of how these are playing out in terms of rural community and economic life.

## References

- Argent, N., P. Smailes, and T. Griffin. 2007. The amenity complex: Towards a framework for analysing and predicting the emergence of a multifunctional countryside in Australia. Geographical Research 45:217-32.
- Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2008. Cross-classified migration tables from the 1996, 2001 and 2006 Censuses of Population and Housing . Canberra, Australia: ABS.
- Barr, N. 2002. Victoria's small farms. CLPR Research Report No. 10, Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Epsom, Australia.
- ---. 2005. The changing social landscape of rural Victoria . Melbourne: Department of Primary Industries.
- ---. 2009. The house on the hill . Melbourne: Land and Water Australia.
- Burnley, I., and P. Murphy. 2004. Sea change: Movement from metropolitan to Arcadian Australia . Sydney: UNSW Press.
- Burrough, P., and R. McDonnell, R. 1998. Principles of geographical information systems . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
- Costello, L. 2007. Going bush: The implications of urban-rural migration. Geographical Research 45:85-94.
- Curry, G., G. Koczberski, and J. Selwood. 2001. Cashing in, cashing out: Rural change on the south coast of Western Australia. Australian Geographer 32:109-24.
- Deller, S., S. Tsai, D. Marcouller, and D. English. 2001. The role of amenities and quality of life in rural economic growth. American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83:352-65.
- Department of Health and Aged Care and the National Key Centre for Social Applications of Geographical

- Information Systems. 1999. Measuring remoteness: Accessibility/Remoteness Index of Australia (ARIA). Occasional Papers, New Series No. 6, Department of Health and Aged Care, Canberra, Australia.
- Drewe, R. 1983. The bodysurfers . Darlinghurst, Australia: James Fraser.
- Gosnell, H., and J. Abrams. 2011. Amenity migration: Diverse conceptualizations of drivers, socioeconomic dimensions and emerging challenges. Geojournal 76:303-22.
- Holmes, J. 2006. Impulses towards a multifunctional transition in rural Australia: Gaps in the research agenda. Journal of Rural Studies 22:142-60.
- Hugo, G. 2005. The state of rural populations. In Sustainability and change in rural Australia , ed. C. Cocklin and J. Dibden, 56-79. Sydney: UNSW Press.
- Hunter, L., J. Boardman, and J. Saint Onge. 2004. The association between natural amenities, rural population growth and long-term residents' economic well-being. Working Paper EB 2004-0005, Institute of Behavioural Science, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO.
- Jones, R., and T. Dolin. 2012. Literary heritage or national heritage? Landscape preservation and change in Dorset. In Heritage 2012: Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Heritage and Sustainable Development , ed. R. S. Amoeda, S. Lira, and C. Pinheiro, 1119-25. Porto, Portugal: Green Lines Institute for Sustainable Development.
- Kennewell, C., and B. Shaw. 2008. Perth, Western Australia. Cities 25:243-55.
- Larsen, S., C. Sorensen, D. McDermott, J. Long, and C. Post. 2007. Place perception and social interaction on an exurban landscape. Professional Geographer 59: 421-33.
- McGranahan, D. 1999. Natural amenities drive rural population change . Agricultural Economic Report No. 781. Washington, DC: Food and Rural Economics Division, Economic Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
- McGranahan, D., and T. Wojan. 2007. Recasting the creative class to examine growth processes in rural and urban counties. Regional Studies 41:197-216.
- McGranahan, D., T. Wojan, and D. Lambert. 2011. The rural growth trifecta: Outdoor amenities, creative class and entrepreneurial context. Journal of Economic Geography 11:529-57.
- Nelson, L., and P. Nelson. 2010. The global rural: Gentrification and linked migration in the rural USA. Progress in Human Geography 35:441-59.
- Salt, B. 2001. The big shift: Welcome to the third Australian culture . South Yarra, Australia: Hardie Grant Books.
- Smailes, P. 2002. From rural dilution to multifunctional countryside: Some pointers to the future from South Australia. Australian Geographer 33:79-96.
- Smailes, P., N. Argent, T. Griffin, and G. Mason. 2002. Rural community social area identification . Adelaide, Australia: National Centre for Social Applications of Geographical Information Systems.
- Smailes, P., T. Griffin, and N. Argent. 2005. The changing social framework. In Sustainability and change in rural Australia , ed. C. Cocklin and J. Dibden, 80-102. Sydney: UNSWPress.
- Smith, M., and R. Krannich. 2000. Culture clash: Newcomer and longer term residents' attitudes toward land use, development and environment in rural communities in the Rocky Mountain West. Rural Sociology 65:396421.
- Sorensen, A. 1990. Virtuous cycles of growth and vicious cycles of decline: Regional economic change in Northern NSW. In Change and adjustment in Northern NSW , ed. D. Walmsley, 41-59. Armidale, Australia: Department of Geography and Planning, University of New England.
- Walmsley, D., N. Argent, F. Rolley, and M. Tonts. 2006. Inland Australia. Paper presented at Australian on the move: Internal migration in Australia. Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia Symposium, Canberra, 21 November.
- Walmsley, D., R. Epps, and C. Duncan. 1998. Migration to the New South Wales North Coast 1986-1991: Lifestyle motivated counterurbanisation. Geoforum 29:10518.
- Wojan, T., D. Lambert, and D. McGranahan. 2007. Emoting with their feet: Bohemian attraction to creative milieu. Journal of Economic Geography 7:711-36.

Correspondence: Division of Geography and Planning, University of New England, Armidale, NSW, Australia 2351, e-mail: nargent@ une.edu.au (Argent); School of Earth and Environment, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, WA, Australia 6009, e-mail: matthew.tonts@uwa.edu.au (Tonts); School of Built Environment, Curtin University, GPO Box U1987, Perth, WA, Australia 6845, e-mail: R.Jones@curtin.edu.au (Jones); School of Geography, Planning and Environmental Management, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia 4072, e-mail: john.beryl.holmes@gmail.com (Holmes).