## Rural  Economic Restructuring and Farm Household Income in Jiangsu, People's  Republic of China

Gregory Veeck* and Clifton W. Pannell**

*Assistant Professor,  Department of Geography and Anthropology,

Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803-4105

- **Professor of Geography, University of Georgia, Athens,  GA 30602

Abstract. Economic reform and  restructuring  in  China  have  resulted  in  substantial changes in how farmers earn their livings and how much they earn.  Based on a neoclassical model of economic development  and structural change a s   interpreted by Oshima (1983) for  East Asia,  we hypothesize that farmers in Jiangsu Province earn greater  incomes from off-farm jobs associated with  nearby cities  and urban market centers.  This income pattern, we believe,  results in distinctive  household types associated with specific employment and economic activities of family members  and reflects a sequence of change in  the farm economy suggestive in part of the farm evolution model posed by Weitz (1971).

A  167-farm-family  sample was  surveyed in four agricultural regions in  Jiangsu  in  1986-87. Sample data identified sources  of family  income and determined the significance of activity types and proximity to cities for family income. Variables  of income, farm,  and  family size were cross-correlated to  determine  those with  the most  significant effects  on  total  family income.  Using principal components analysis and cluster  analysis,  we  identified three household types  based  on  income sources: traditional agricultural,  mixed,  and industrially focused.  Farmers closest to the large city of  Suzhou were  the  most  prosperous,  with incomes derived largely from industrial employment,  while farmers in  more remote locations appeared most traditional,  earning a larger share of their income from field cultivation.  While location is believed significant in  the processes of economic change, its role cannot be specified based on currently available data.

Key Words: China,  development,  economic  reforms,  economic  restructuring,  farm,  jiangsu,  income,  peasant, People's Republic o f China,  rural, urban.

HE  rural  economy  in  China  has  been changing rapidly in recent years as a result of reforms initiated in  late 1978 (Lardy  1986;  Xue  1986;  Chow  1987). An  essential element of these reforms is the transfer of land under contracts to farm families for  long periods. This approach is markedly different from that of the commune system, wherein the state controlled all use of rural land, although peasants were allowed to farm small private plots. Under the new system, families typically  have quotas  for the production  of food grain  at guaranteed  state prices, with higher incentive prices for producingabove the quota. Familiesare  also allowed to market surplus commodities on  their own and to determine how they allocate investment resources and other  inputs to their contracted land (Travers 1984; Crook 1986).

A very complex set of farming arrangements has  resulted in which farm families seek to increase their  incomes, usually by  means other than farming,  while  complying with the state rules  established  to  insure  a continuing, reliable output of food grain. Since the monetary rewards for growing food grain  are generally considerably less than for  other  crops or sideline activities  such  as swine, fowl, or fish production (Han 1988), families have focused more on cash crops or other activities, including jobs in village  or  township  collective  industries, to increase their  incomes. The families try to meet food grain quotas by minimizing labor input, thus freeing themselves to increase their  in-

Figure 1. Agricultural  regions of Jiangsu Province. Study sites in eight counties where sample surveys were conducted are indicated with black circles.

<!-- image -->

comes through  the other  activities  (Oi 1986; Travers 1986; Cheng 1987). Problems, however, have emerged. For example, farm output grew rapidly between 1978 and 1984, but food grain production has tapered off since 1984, due in part to stagnating agricultural investment. Chinese policy makers appear to be debating which policies are most efficacious in improving rural incomes from agricultural production while insuring a sufficient supply o f food grain and minimizing the costs of farming (Liu et al.

1987,  161-68; Sunan jianwei .  .  . 1988). Moreover,  there appear to be some regional variations in the complex patterns of farming,  output  growth  and improvements  in  farming efficiency.  Among the places in China where this rural restructuring has advanced rapidly is Jiangsu Province  and  especially  its  southern third (the Sunan region), with its favorable agricultural environment, well-developed  transportation system and well-integrated  network of cities and towns (Fig. 1).

## Purpose and Coals

This paper describes  and analyzes the effects of these reforms  on farm-family income in eight counties located in  four agricultural regions of Jiangsu  Province (Fig. 1). Specifically, it will attempt  to describe the sources of  income for the families and to analyze the most important factors in  determining the evolving patterns of family  income. We  also  seek  to  identify  and explain locational patterns  associated  with how farm  families  in these  different  regions  and counties of  Jiangsu earn their  livings. income data for the study were derived from interviews with members of 167 farm families in the stud- ied areas during 1986-87.

An examination and analysis of how Jiangsu farmers are currently deriving their income may cast  some  new light on the above questions, and some new insight may be  achieved  into  the structural and locational  patterns  of agricultural development and commercialization in one of

China's leading regions of economic growth.

Changes occurring in  the study areas involve several  key aspects  of  the  multifaceted  rural economy-crop production, sideline  activities, labor  input  and  the  increasing links to  rural industries  and to  markets  in  adjacent  towns and cities (Table 1). Viewed broadly, the key questions we seek to  answer are: (1) how do farmers earn  their incomes  in  the study  areas of Jiangsu? (2)  what is the effect of economic restructuring on how these farmers earn their livings?  (3) what role,  if  any,  does  location  have  in explaining patterns  of farm family income?  and (4) how do the processes of structural shift and rising productivity of farm labor in southern Jiangsu  accord with the theoretical explanations of economic  modernization  in East  Asia  as  Oshima (1983) has expressed them?

## The Modernization  and Economic Restructuring of Socialist China: Some Theoretical Concerns

China is in the process of  rapid change and economic  experimentation.  The  extremes of central  planning  and  regional autarchy  have been abandoned,  at least temporarily.  Market approaches to economic growth are being used increasingly,  especially  in  the rural  sector. From a theoretical perspective, we argue that recent economic restructuring represents  some modification  of  strict  socialism  based  on  central planning in favor  of  policies at  least  partially associated with the neoclassical  structural change  models a s   described by  Lewis (1955), Fei  and  Ranis(1964),  elaborated  by Chenery  and Syrquin (1975) and Chenery (1979),  and summarized  for East Asia by Oshima  (1983). in  these models, structural change in  the economic system is characterized by a shift in employment share from agriculture to industry (the modern urban sector),  with a concomitant  increase in wages and possible  spatial shift of rural workers to an  urban or  peri-urban  location.  Sectoral shifts in contribution to national output or income also occur as agriculture's share declines and  industry's  share  increases.  According  to Chenery (1979),  the point at  which these two sectors have equal income shares represents  an important shift in development between early and transitional  stages of structural change. This usually occurs  when a country's per-capita CNP reaches  $600.  Chenery's  empirical  work  also disclosed  that where such structural shifts  were occurring and  industrialization  and urbanization were increasing  rapidly, the distribution of income was  becoming more inegalitarian. For China these  models may  not be entirely  appropriate, but  they offer a useful  gauge for analysis and comparison, especially  since Chenery's findings are based on empirical investigation  of

Third World cases.

The  special  challenge of  development  for China is how to deal with labor absorption of rural  workers  (Fei  1983).  A  structural  shift  in sectoral output  and  employment  share  indicates many farm workers will shift to industrial or  perhaps service activities. Yet  how will this process  occur,  since  China  has  such  a  large population and a large rural work force? Population growth, while moderating, nonetheless adds about 15 million people each year,  maintaining  enormous  pressure  for  employment growth. Can the industrial or urban-based service sectors absorb large numbers, both of current farm workers, who wish to increase their incomes  by shifting to  off  -farm jobs, and of new workers, who enter the labor force each year through population growth?

Oshima  (1983)  has provided  a useful  synthesis of a theoretical model of structural shift, commercialization of  farm  economies and demo-

Table 1. Labor in Four Rural Prefectures by Employment Sector, 1985'

| Location           |   Total population |   Total workforce | Agriculture   | Forestry, fisheries, husbandry, sideline   | Industry   | Construction   |
|--------------------|--------------------|-------------------|---------------|--------------------------------------------|------------|----------------|
| Jiangsu            |             51,530 |            25,992 | 15,228(58)    | 1812(7)                                    | 4756 (17)  | 1502(6)        |
| Nantong Prefecture |               6648 |              3950 | 2094 (53)     | 333 (8)                                    | 700(17)    | 331(8)         |
| Nanjing Prefecture |               2520 |              1217 | 672 (51)      | 106(9)                                     | 277 (23)   | 66 (5)         |
| Suzhou Prefecture  |               4230 |              2692 | 1035(38)      | 221 (8)                                    | 1027(38)   | 144(5)         |
| Huaiyin Prefecture |               8074 |              3528 | 2822 (80)     | 223 (6)                                    | 146(4)     | 97 (3)         |

= In 1000s;

percentage in parentheses.

Source: Editorial Committee, 1987, 111-17.

graphic change that occurred in Japan,  Taiwan, and  South  Korea.  In this  model  the  rate  of growth in the per-capita output of farm workers exceeded growth in the labor force; at the same time overall farm output and yields grew. Farm wages also increased. This rural prosperity led to increased  demand for  labor-saving equipment and consumer products, and this in turn increased demand for  workers in nearby industries  producing  agricultural  equipment and consumer goods such as textiles and garments. More jobs were created in  industry, and many  peasants  moved  off  the  farms  to  the higher-paying urban-based industrial jobs. An export-oriented  strategy  of  industrial  growth based on the comparatively low cost of  labor further fueled the demand  for rural laborers in cities,  and the  migration  of  ruralites to cities proceeded rapidly. Hence, a shift in the structure of production  from agriculture to industry occurred. In Japan  this shift took place during the 1950s. In Taiwan it began in the mid-I960s, and based on employment sectors,  the economy was  more industrial than agricultural  by the early 1970s. In Korea the shift occurred in the late 1970s.

The  East  Asian  cases o f Japan, Taiwan  and South Korea are thus valuable because of their similarity to China in  cultural backgrounds  and settings, despite obvious historical differences in the  manner  in which the civilizations have developed and the societies have evolved. Taiwan, of course, is a Chinese culture despite its 50 years of Japanese  colonial  history (1895-1945). Although  these  three  examples  are  marketbased economies, the success of this East Asian model makes it valuable as a comparative theoretical device for  events  unfolding  in China today.  Such a  model  is  useful as  we  seek  to evaluate and understand  the significance  of farreaching changes underway in parts of Jiangsu Province in recent years.

Structural shift  in the  rural and  peri-urban economy of Jiangsu Province may be a useful guide to understanding economic growth and development in  the larger body of China in  the future. Analysis of changing employment  patterns and rising income o f rural workers in a number of different  regions of Jiangsu should permit us to understand better the conditions o f economic change and development and to affirm the extent to which these conditions of change and development comport with Oshima's East Asian model and the broader theories of  development and structural change  noted above. It may also help us to evaluate whether or  not China's path to development, based on special conditions of rural change,  is indeed a unique case  as  postulated in models of  economic development and structural shift without  massive  urbanization  (Perkins and  Yusuf 1984,  3-28; Zweig 1987 ) .

## Weitz's Model of Agricultural Change in the Context of Jiangsu

Another  useful model of  rural change and agricultural  development  posits a three-stage sequence  from subsistence to mixed to specialized farming (Weitz 1971 ) . While all of the conditions that Weitz (1971) identified  may not be found in  China, the idea  of transforming the agricultural  economy from a  subsistence system,  where  production is  sufficient  for  local needs with low levels of surplus and exchange, to a  mixed,  diversified  kind of  farming-as a first step toward specialized farming-is useful

and appealing. This kind of transformation will depend on the ability  of  farmers to increase productivity and output,  itself dependent  on changes in levels of technology, availability of modern inputs, and improvements in knowledge  of  farming  and  marketing  conditions (Zweig 1985). Such a  progression also implies greater  commercialization  and  integration  of rural areas  with urban markets.  Ultimately, as progress continues,  the shift  to a specialized kind of farming with high land and labor productivity  and  a  high  degree of  commerciali- zation of surplus production will follow.

At this point, it is not certain if China views this sequential model as  appropriate.  But the terminology  of  mixed  and  specialized farm households is  used frequently,  implying  that this model has relevance for the Chinese case (Xue 1986; Liu et al. 1987).  Moreover, the Weitz model is valuable in that it provides a context for  examining and evaluating the transformation of  agriculture  and the rural economy  in

China.'

At the present  time, the direction  of the new rural  policies  in China is  unclear.  In Jiangsu, most local  cadres  and rural planners  are  actively supporting  what  has  come  to  be  called  the 'mixed' peasant  household, in  which  the members of  a  single  household generate  income from a combination of  agricultural,  industrial and cottage-style activities. This  mixture was certainly the prevalent pattern among households included in our surveys. Whether or not this is intended  to be the pattern of the future  is  not certain.  Many  researchers have endorsed what might be  called  the 'specialized household' model where agricultural production increasingly becomes the sole occupation of  gifted  and knowledgeable farmers,  as  offfarm employment develops  sufficiently to  draw surplus rural labor from the fields. Research on the  appropriate  scale  of  holdings  (Wu  1987) suggests that a farm household could be much more efficient  if  landholdings were increased by a  factor  of  three.  This would mean that  if the 'specialized household' model is adopted extensively, two of every three families would be convinced or coerced to give up their land. This model would create a much different employment structure than the one currently  in place.

It  appears then that the critical policy question is whether the 'mixed'  income household i s   a transitional type which will be phased out as   the  'specialized  household'  develops,  or whether  it is to remain the basic production model in Jiangsu  and the rest of  the country. If it  is  a transitional model, the current inequity between  farmers with off-farm employment and those with no off-farm employment does not need to be addressed. But if it is not, then local and regional  inequities appear to  be increasing, either as  indicated in Chenery's  model or per-

haps on a more long-term, enduring level.

## Background and Study Area

Jiangsu  is one of China's  most economically advanced areas. The lower Changjiang  (Yangtze) Basin has about 1100 mm of precipitation annually, a growing season of approximately 230 days and generally productive red and yellow alluvial  paddy and podzol soils. The region developed an intensive rice and fishing economy more than  1000 years  ago.  With steady  production growth over  the centuries,  improvements in farming led to more intensive cropping  systems based mainly  on  rice  but including also  vegetables  and cash  crops such  as  mulberry/silkworms, tea  and  cotton. Improvements  in transportation  developed  over  the centuries. The  lower  Changjiang region early had an effective and low-cost transport system based on rivers  and canals which integrated the local and regional economies with the larger political  control  centers  and  regions  of  the North China Plain through  the  Grand Canal. Thus for  many centuries this region has  been one of China's most advanced in  economic development and production.

The region's spatial  integration  has continued into  contemporary times and has made this part of China a laboratory of great significance for  analyzing conditions of  economic  growth and development under socialism (Wiens 1982). Regions such as  Jiangsu are good bellwethers for the broader Chinese economy and help indicate the direction and success of policies for the entire economy (Rothenberg 1987).

initially designed to study different cropping systems and strategies in southern Jiangsu, one aspect of this study evolved a focus on income among farm families.  The  study area  was  expanded to include two counties in northern

Figure 2. Prefectures and counties where sample surveys were conducted in Jiangsu Province.

<!-- image -->

Jiangsu to provide a  broader sample that  reflected  conditions  throughout  the  province. The four  specific regions for  farm interviews, each of which contained two counties, are depicted in Figures 1  and 2. These are: (1) two counties within Nanjing Prefecture north and south of the Changjiang; (2) suburban areas of Suzhou city, one northeast of the city and one near  Lake Tai; (3) rural areas  in Nantong Prefecture  on the  northern bank of the  Changjiang,  one  along the  river  and  one  near  the coast;  and (4) partially rural areas near Huaiyin, an old port city on the Grand  Canal in northern Jiangsu  Province.

These four  study sites  represent somewhat different  environmental  settings  within  the broader  setting  of  Jiangsu Province and also varying  degrees  of  linkage to  urban  marketplaces of varying sizes.  These variations affect the  possibilities for  marketing  various  commodities produced on the farms, but more important,  they  provide different  labor  opportunities  for peasants  seeking industrial  or service jobs  and  in that  way  may  strongly affect  the total  farm-family  income.  Patterns of  income and locational variation within each of the four study areas as well as among them will be analyzed.

## Data and Methodology

Data for  this study were drawn from larger surveys on family farm production and income conducted  during late 1986 and 1987 at  the four study sites.* The methods employed were selected  to  test  and  answer  three  main  hypotheses.  First,  we  hypothesize that  off  -farm employment opportunities  have become the most  important  source  of  income;  families which do not have access to  such opportunities will exhibit much lower incomes. We will describe,  compare and analyze patterns of farm family income in the four study areas of Jiangsu Province. This will be done by providing  a series of quantitative measures on various  indices of average family income, such as average income derived  from  crop  production,  sidelines,  industrial jobs,  and other activities in the different  regions. Tabular  statistics  and correlation analysis will be used to verify  this hypothesis. Later the use of principal  componentsand cluster analysis  will  be  employed  to  identify internal variation among households for  income-related variables within each county and to identify household types grouped by income characteristics rather than by location.

Second, we hypothesize that variation in  the degree of  commercialization within the agricultural systems  points  to higher  income associated with  proximity  to urban  markets or access to rural or urban industrial employment opportunities.  Summary statistics based on location alone would neglect this important pattern of local  income variability and uneven employment opportunities which have considerable political and policy significance. Preliminary  analysis of the income  data suggests that  households within each county,  or  even township, exhibit a notable degree of variation in the sources of  income from household to household. That is,  the location of each household may  sometimes be a  poor estimator of total income or the sources of that income. We report data on the economies of the basic economic unit-the household.

Third,  we hypothesize that distinct 'household types' can be identified which represent the different strategies which households  have used to generate income. Both the Weitz and Oshima models may  be invoked to help  understand the process of  family economic  behavior in the Jiangsu sampled households. In this way,  we  may  identify  a  sequence of  development taking place in rural and suburban Jiangsu  and reflected in farm-household activ-

ities.

## Classification with Principal Components and Cluster Analysis

To provide a  rigorous means for  accepting or rejecting our second and third hypotheses, we can classify the households  and identify the, appropriate criteria for distinguishing 'household types.'  The first step will be to determine what demographic or income variables will explain  the  variance  observed  among  the  sampled households.  Principal components analysis (PCA) is a  method for  expressing information in  an alternative form which is often more succinct than the original (Jackson 1983,  1 1 1 - 1 3 0 ) . For each component created, each household in the sample will  have a  component  score, which describes the location of  that observation on the component.

In a  sense,  these  new  variables  are  denser manifestations of  the  original variables.  Once these  component  scores  have  been  created through PCA, they can be used like other variables to create groups through cluster analysis. The cluster analysis will be used to  assign membership in defined groups to each household in the sample. Because the component scores derived from the PCA will be used to determine the  clusters,  the  clusters represent the types  of  households  delimited  by  the  PCA. Once each household is assigned membership in  a 'household  type,'  sources of income and household characteristics will be identified for each type.

One cautionary note regarding the survey data is in order. The farmers interviewed had higher incomes,  on the average, than the average incomes  reported in 1986 Chinese  count y   survey data of the  same counties. In  two  cases (Nantong  and  Huaiyin  Prefectures)  the  surveyed farmers had average incomes  about twice those reported in official data (Editorial Committee, 1987,3:67-83). The reasons for this discrepancy are not entirely clear, but we believe that Chinese 0fficia.h  wished to provide sample farmers who  were  generally  more successful and prosperous than were average farmers in the four respective study areas.3

Table 2. County Average Income, Farm and Family Size, Jiangsu  Sample'

|                          | Nantong   | Nantong   | Nanjing   | Nanjing   | Suzhou   | Suzhou   | Huaiyin   | Huaiyin   |
|--------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|
|                          | Nantong   | Rudong    | Liuhe     | Jiangning | Wu       | Wuiiang  | Huaiyin   | Huaian    |
| Sample size (households) | n = 7     | n = l l   | n = 2 3   | n = 2 1   | n = 2 6  | n = 8    | n = 30    | n = 39    |
| Net agriculture          | 1711      | 1621      | 2157      | 1138      | 622      | 1049     | 1263      | 1969      |
| Net sidelines            | 728       | 764       | 704       | 800       | 590      | 650      | 1063      | 924       |
| Net industry             | 2657      | 2480      | 1022      | 541       | 4009     | 2888     | 146       | 633       |
| Gross sales              | 831       | 573       | 2076      | 1024      | 69       | 400      | 402       | 1179      |
| Net other                | 0         | 336       | 599       | 655       | 252      | 33       | 802       | 1187      |
| Farm size (mu)           | 3.4       | 4.7       | 7.5       | 5.8       | 2.5      | 4.9      | 5.2       | 5.2       |
| Family size (persons)    | 5.3       | 4.2       | 4.7       | 4.3       | 4.1      | 4.9      | 4.5       | 5.4       |
| Per capita income        | 962       | 1238      | 954       | 729       | 1335     | 943      | 728       | 873       |
| Total                    | 5096      | 5201      | 4482      | 3134      | 5473     | 4620     | 3274      | 4713      |

Source: Field surveys, 1986-87.

## Findings and Interpretation

Farm-family  income within the study areas of Jiangsu Province varied markedly both among and within the four  study areas.  Suzhou and Nantong Prefectures had easily the highest average incomes of the areas studied; this level was  reflected in the official data as well as the survey data. Nanjing  and Huaiyin  followed, with Huaiyin having  the lowest income according to official data. A comparison of official data and survey average  income data showed that  the surveyed averages were closest to official averages in Nanjing  and Suzhou, with the greatest discrepancies  occurring  in Huaiyin and  Nantong Prefectures. The reasons for this indicate the non-random nature of the sample surveys. The farmers  surveyed were  selected by  local responsible units and not by the investigator. The high average incomes in the Nantong sample may also be explained in part by the small sample size (18 families) in Nantong Prefecture compared with larger samples (34,  44  and 69) in the other three prefectures.

Generally the official data on prefectural income agree  logically with  data  presented  in Table I, which indicate employment share of labor in four  major sectors of the prefectures surveyed.  Huaiyin has the highest agricultural employment (80 percent) and lowest industrial employment (4 percent). Suzhou is the reverse, with  the  lowest agricultural  employment  (38 percent)  and  the  highest  industrial  employment (38 percent)  among the four prefectures. Nanjing and  Nantong had almost equal agri- cultural employment shares (51 percent and 53 percent respectively), but Nanjing had 23 percent  industrial  employment  compared  with Nantong's  17 percent.  The  employment  patterns in  these two prefectures suggest that the Nantong sample was the least representative  of average conditions in that prefecture.

Data on a number of different components of average income were collected. Findings  are reported on nine that seem most salient  and directly linked to the issue of income and how it was  earned in these farm families.  Averages for  various  measures of  farm and  related  income, family,  work force and farm size are reported in Table 2.

Among the most interesting and challenging regional  findings are the high  average industrial incomes reported in  Suzhou  and Nantong Prefectures. Farmersare  traveling off farms to  work full time in rural or suburban industries, while other family members help with much of the farm work. Often more than one family member has a factory job, and farming is a part-time activity. Nowhere is this more apparent than in Suzhou  Prefecture,  where  average  net  agricultural income is less than 15 percent of the average total income for  the  34  farm families surveyed. In  Huaiyin Prefecture  average net income from field agriculture,among the 69 families surveyed,  is about 40  percent of  the average total income. Remarkable discrepancies exist among farmers within each county; these appear  to reflect  proximity to urban markets and greater accessibility to industrial job  opportunities. Nantong Prefecture has developed

Table 3. Pearson Correlation Coefficients for Significant Variables Associated with Total Income

|                        | Nanjing   | Nanjing   | Nantong   | Nantong   | Suzhou   | Suzhou   | Huaiyin   | Huaiyin   |
|------------------------|-----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|----------|----------|-----------|-----------|
|                        | Liuhe     | Jiangning | Nantong   | Rudong    | Wu       | Wujiang  | Huaiyin   | Huaian    |
| Agriculture            | .I9       | .73       | .57       | .58       | .46      | .I3      | .38       | .79       |
| Industry               | .95       | .91       | .57       | .38       | .86      | .96      | .31       | .39       |
| Sideline activities    | -.33      | .55       | .71       | .I6       | .60      | .51      | .66       | .22       |
| Other income           | .oo       | -.05      | .27       | .50       | .42      | -.34     | .61       | .70       |
| Farm size (in mu)      | .26       | .25       | - -.22    | .56       | .37      | .46      | .24       | .I2       |
| Family size            | .a3       | .57       | .45       | .33       | .69      | .61      | .31       | .29       |
| Work force size        | .91       | .77       | .a2       | .40       | .73      | .32      | .48       | .42       |
| Nedgross income per mu | .55       | -.40      | .06       | -.23      | .27      | -37      | .01       | -.01      |

Source: Calculated from field survey data, 1986-87.

into a center  for  light  industry  because of  its access to national  and international markets  via good water transportation.

Income from sideline activities varied,  with Suzhou  having  the  lowest  and  Huaiyin  the highest averages. Sidelines range from raising silkworms, fowl and fish to cultivating clams for pearls.  Sideline activities appear  most important in  those areas where farming remains  most important. At the same time these activities  obviously require a market linkage and proximity to a commercial center and a system of commercialized agriculture. Paradoxically Suzhou, whose households have perhaps the best spat i a l   and  commercial  linkages,  has  the  lowest income from sidelines.  This apparent paradox likely  occurs  because  alternate  off  -farm  opportunities  are  more  lucrative.  The  category 'Other'  income ranges markedly from a high of more than 1000 yuan in Huaiyin to nothing in  N a n t ~ n g . ~ This income was derived from activities including  government work, service jobs and self-employment, such as truck- or  boatdriving or wholesale activities.

Throughout this sample survey there was little variation in family size and the size of  the family work force.  There was,  however, a significant  difference  in farm size,  with  Nanjing and Huaiyin having average surveyed farms of more than 5 mu, whereas Suzhou farm size averaged only  3.55 mu.5  Obviously farm size  is related inversely to population density, which in turn reflects the availability of  more alternative  income  sources  in the  Sunan  region. Again this finding suggests that in Nanjing and Huaiyin the sample surveyed was a more rural group devoted more strongly to  farming  a s  their major activity  than were those  in Suzhou.  In

Suzhou the farm size,  and therefore  logically the income opportunities and labor demands of  farming,  are reduced. This is corroborated in that  the  average  share  of  income  derived from agriculture in Suzhou Prefecture is lower than  in the  other  areas.  Agricultural  income does not give a good indicator of total income, for  conversely the  Suzhou farmers,  with  the smallest  average agricultural  income,  had the highest  average  total  income  of  the  Jiangsu sample (Table 2).  This finding alone offers evidence to justify  accepting our  first  main hypothesis.

## Relationships Among Variables

If  we take the major income-related variables on which  this  study  is based  and  run crosscorrelations on all the variables for  the entire sample of 167 farm families,  a few  significant relationships  appear. The size of the work force i n  the family was  most significant in  explaining the size of three income measures: agricultural net,  industrial employment, and total income. This is logical, and it  seems clear that where the work force is larger, one or more family members are going off the farm to work  in a  rural collective factory and are in fact  earning at a higher rate than would be possible  if they were concentrating only on farm work. Another important contributor to total income, according to the correlation coefficients, is income produced from sideline activities. Sideline activities  in Jiangsu, as  noted,  include  such  farmrelated  activities  as animal  husbandry; fish farming; raising  chickens, ducks  and geese; growing ornamental trees;  raising silkworms,  bees,

I

Figure 3. Main transportation lines in Jiangsu  Province.

<!-- image -->

earthworms, and scorpions (for  medicine); or making  small items  such as ornaments  or brushes   for  export.

Finally,  the  main  determinants  of  total  income for these  167 farm families as  indicated in  these cross-correlations  were (1)  income  from industrial  employment (r =  .60);(2)  income  from other activities  such as serving  asa cadre, teacher or truck driver (r = .40); and (3) income from sideline activities (r = .26). Closely related factors were the size o f the family (r = .38)  and the size of the workforce (r =  .54) in  that family. It  i s  interesting that the area o f the farm (in  mu)

indicated little effect on total family income (r = .0 5 ) . These results provide further  justification  for accepting  our first main hypothesis  that the primary sources of family income are based on off  -farm employment.

## Regional Analysis of  Income Patterns

There  is  considerable regional variation  in how Jiangsu  farmers derive their incomes. This variation may be seen at two scales within the Jiangsu provincial sample of  167 households.

First,  there  is  some  interesting yet  complex variation  among the  four  prefectural  sample survey sites. To some extent this variation may be accounted for  superficially by the  general location and proximity of the sample to a large urban center-Nantong, Suzhou,  or  Nanjing, for example. More important may be a second factor-where the sample survey is located relative to market centers of varying sizes nearby and to what extent this specific study site may have good connectivity to local urban or periurban activities that offer either marketing opportunities for farm commodities or other off  farm employment opportunities such as truck driving or factory work (Fig. 3).

The  patterns of  income generation  in this rapidly  changing  and economically  dynamic  part of China are varied and complex. The analysis will attempt  to identify  some of  the patterns that  emerged in the eight  counties and four prefectures  studied. Our specific goal is to  point to what may be salient  relationships and associations  among  different  income-generating industrial  employment  in rural  industries,  sideline  activities,  and  other sources of income. We also explore what effect family size,  work force size, and farm size have activities-farming, on family income.

These variables can be evaluated on the basis of  Pearson correlation  analysis for  the  eightcounty sample surveys (Table 3).  For purposes of causation, we view total income as  the dependent variable, and the other factors are associated as  having some  role in determining farm-family  income.  Conceptually  this  perspective is logical and appropriate because we are  analyzing a  set  of  policies and a  farming system in flux,  and our  goal is to identify and determine factors affecting overall household income. Our major assumption is that policies which are decentralizing  decision making on cropping,  land tenure and use and marketing of farm commoditiesare affecting the changing patterns of  farm  income. We  further assume these farmers seek  to increase their  incomes and will  make choices and operate in such a way  as to raise total household income.

In all of the study sites (Table 3),  income derived from rural collective industrial jobs  is a very significant part of total income. This is especially prominent  in the counties in Suzhou (r  = .86 and .96) and Nantong Prefectures  (r = .95 and .91). In  Huaiyin  Prefecture  the  area most removed from a  major urban center,  the re- lationship between industrial income and total income was weakest (r = .31  and .39). Industrial income was  also  generally  closely  associated with family size and size of the work force;  it is clear that both variables are also consistently and closely tied to the size of  family income. Such a pattern makes sense whether one is  considering  income derived  from farming,  sideline, industrial or other money-generating activities. The larger the family and work force,

the more people available to work and earn.

Income generated  from agricultural activities presents a  more varied  pattern  spatially. For example, all prefectures have counties with significant agricultural income. Only Wujiang and Nantong Counties have correlation coefficients of less than .20, and these are the two counties that  have the highest correlation  coefficients associated with their industrial income (r = .96 and .95  respectively).  Huaiyin and  Huaian Counties are noteworthy because they are far from  a  major  metropolis  and  in  that  sense seemingly  more  rural.  But  Huaiyin  city  had 373,000  people in 1985 and possessed a sizable urban hinterland.  In these  two  counties  the correlation  coefficients  associated  with  agricultural activities were split (Huaiyin-r = .38 and Huaian-r =  .79), which reflects the urban/ peri-urban  and  rural  dichotomy.  This  difference  suggests  significant  contrasts  between these two counties in  the manner in  which economic reforms in agriculture are taking effect. if we turn to income from sideline activities, Huaiyin's pattern is more logical, for here total income has a high association with sideline activities (r =  .66). Yet other areas are not  s o  clear. Total income in Nantong County, for example, i s  inversely associated with sideline activities (r = -.33), whereas Jiangning  County in Nanjing Prefecture and Wu County (fish  farming) in Suzhou Prefecture have high associations (.71  and .60). The importance of sideline production to total income varies considerably from place to place, and it is necessary to  examine  each locale and  investigate the  many  specific  and  often complex ways in  which local farm families have learned to supplement their  incomes.

The size of the farm (cultivated  area) is another important  variable  in  the  income  equation. Generally farm size does not associate strongly with total income. In two counties where the sample farmers generated  a substantial  share of their  income  from  agriculture  (Rudong and Liuhe),  large farm size was  associated moder-

ately with total income. Paradoxically, among the sampled  farmers in  the county (Huaian) that had the strongest linkage between agricultural income and total incomes, farm size was a poor predictor of total income (r = .12). Specialized cash  cropping  in this area  renders the  usual relationship between  farm  size  and  farm  income  inconsequential.  A  number  of  these farmers  were specializing  in  vegetable production to local wholesalers for  resale in Huaiyin or even as far away as Nanjing.

This  finding  suggests that  the  relationships among farm size, agricultural income and total income in Jiangsu tend to be highly localized and place-specific. It illustrates  again the enormous variety and the far  reaching complexity of the ways of farming and maximizing income that exist in a region of great economic dynamism and change under policies of economic reform and restructuring.  The above analysis also indicates the difficulty  in establishing the role of  location in determining household income. The degree of spatial complexity of the patterns identified makes it impossible to accept  our  second  hypothesis.  Location  is  no doubt important, but our analysis does not permit  us  to specify  exactly  how  it affects  total income.

Perhaps the  most  challenging of  the  listed variables is the one pertaining to capital conversion per unit of land under cultivation. This is,  in fact,  the  net-to-gross income ratio that represents, exclusive of labor, the profit-to-cost ratio of farming on the land. How does it relate to total income?  Not very well, although there are  some  interesting  facets  of  this  variable among the eight study sites. In  Wujiang County (Suzhou  Prefecture),  the county with the weakest agricultural and strongest industrial income in relation to total  income, the  total  income was  strongly  inversely related  to  the  net-togross income ratio (r = -.87).  This finding suggests  that  farming  in an  area where  much of the family's  income is derived from industrial jobs becomes  a secondary activity, and there is little or  no interest in worrying over whether the land  is  farmed productively and intensively. A different pattern is true for Nantong County where industrial income is strongly and agricultural income  weakly associated  with total income. Here the farming seems to be more intensive in terms of  annual land use,  and the application of organic manures, which are very cheap or free,  is the second highest (r = .55)

among members  of the surveyed  sample for the wheat-rice crop combination.

## Principal Components and Cluster Analysis

The previous analysis was  directed at  comparing  and contrasting the various income  variables as  they  differ  by  location. The principal components analysis (PCA)  and clustering analysis procedures  were intended  to isolate aspatial of  households which  exhibit  similar characteristics and could be used to explore the  impact  of  off-farm  income  on household economies within the surveyed re-

'types' further gions of Jiangsu.

The principal components analysis was  conducted using  seven variables by which variation among the households in the sample could be identified. These variables are: number of persons living in the household, the area of agricultural land under contract, the gross value of off-farm sales,  annual agricultural net income, annual net income from sidelines (cottage industries and husbandry), annual income from industrial employment, and income from non- industrial off-farm employment.

The PCA resulted  in  the identification of three eigenvectors (Table 4).  The associated  eigenvalues can be used to determine the amount of total variance  explained by each vector. The three eigenvectors  (components)  accounted  for 72  percent  of  the  variance  within  the  seven variables  across  the  entire  sample.  The  first component  had  high  correlations  with  agricultural  net  income (.91), off-farm  sales  (.86), farmland under contract  (.86),  and family size (.54).  These  loadings suggest  that  large scores on  the  first  component  are  associated  with households which  could be viewed  as  traditional  agricultural  peasant  households.  This component was  labeled 'the  traditional agriculture component';  it  accountsfor 39 percent of the variance.

The second component accounts for 17 percent  of  the variation. While  agricultural  variables do not load highly, industrial income  (.78) correlates highly with the second component. Large scores on the second component are associated with  households with  industrial  income, but not the other types of off-farm employment.  This  component  is  defined as  the 'industrial  income component.'

The third  and final component accounted  for

Table 4. Principal Components Analysis on 167 Cases From Jiangsu  Sample

|                                                   |   Component loadings |   Component loadings |   Component loadings |
|---------------------------------------------------|----------------------|----------------------|----------------------|
| Variables                                         |                 1    |                 2    |                 3    |
| Agricultural net value                            |                 0.91 |                      |                      |
| Agricultural off-farm sales                       |                 0.86 |                      |                      |
| Farm size (mu)                                    |                 0.86 |                      |                      |
| Family size (persons)                             |                 0.54 |                      |                 0.52 |
| Industrial income                                 |                      |                 0.78 |                      |
| Other income                                      |                      |                 0.69 |                      |
| Income from sidelines                             |                      |                      |                 0.85 |
| Variance explained by each component (percentage) |                39    |                17    |                16    |

Source: Calculated from field survey data, 1986-87.

16 percent of variance  within the sample. it  was poorly correlated with both the agriculturally related and  industrially  related  variables,  but did correlate with income from sidelines (35).

The PCA results in the production of three component  scores  for  each  household.  The scores are transformations  of the original seven variables; they are also uncorrelated. The component  scores  are  used to  create household clusters which display relatively homogeneous characteristics with respect to income sources and family size. The clustering method  selected was  Ward's  minimum variance  procedure. While any number of clusters can be stipulated for the cluster analysis, the data reflects  a threegroup natural break (Table 5). These three clusters explain more than 62 percent of the variation of the 167 households. The clusters may also be given descriptive names based on the characteristics of  the households classified in each  type.  The  identification  of  these  three clusters associated with specific  rural  household types also justifies the acceptance of our third main hypothesis, which posited that distinct household  typescould be identified  in  the restructuring economy.

The first we call the 'Agriculturally  Focused' cluster. These households are characterized by the lowest per capita and total household incomes,  a  small  reported workforce,  and  the greatest  percentage of  total  income  derived from  agricultural  production.  These  families most closely resemble the subsistence farmers in  the Weitz model. The cluster analysis placed the largest  number of  households in this category. Of the 167 household sample, 44  percent (74)  were included in this household type.

The second cluster includes the 'lnterme-

Table 5. Membership in 'Household  Type' Classification Determined by Ward's Minimum Variance

|                        | Prefecture       | Prefecture     | Prefecture    | Prefecture     |
|------------------------|------------------|----------------|---------------|----------------|
| Cluster (percentage)   | Nan- tong n = 20 | Nanjing n = 45 | Suzhou n = 34 | Huaiyin n = 68 |
| focused Agriculturally | 8(40)            | 25 (56)        | l(3)          | 39(57)         |
| group Intermediate     | 5 (25)           | 19 (42)        | l(3)          | 24 (35)        |
| focused Industrially   | 7(35)            | l(3)           | 32 (94)       | 5 (7)          |

Source: Derived from field survey data, 1986-87.

diate Households,'  where  income from agriculture  and  industrial  positions are  both important.  The  values  for  the  income-related variables tend to be considerably higher than those of the first cluster. The amount of contracted land by  household is more similar to the households in  the first cluster than to  those in the  final cluster.  Family size for  this  intermediate  group  is  larger  than  for  the  other groups. This middle group represents 29 percent (48)  of the sample. In  general, these households appear  to  be  much  more  involved  in commercial agriculture than do the traditional households, with  the  value  of of f -farm  sales more than double the value for such sales for the  more traditional 'Agriculturally  Focused' households.  These  households  seem  to  be committed at least in  part to  increasing  income through expanded agricultural production,  as indicated by greater off  -farm sales  and larger amounts of  contracted land.  They  appear  to identify most closely with the 'mixed'  farmers discussed  in Weitz's  typology.  These  households also present a contrast to the final group, whose members apparently have rejected agriculture  as a significant  means of raising household income.  It  is  possible that  this  type  of household represents a transitional form  between the first  and third  types.  An alternate interpretation  is  that  these  intermediate households  could  also potentially become specialized agricultural households (zhuanye nonghu) and focus their  energy on producing a single  crop  or commodity efficiently. Here  they would more closely resemble the specialized farmers described by Weitz.

The final cluster is composed of households in which industrial  income  is o f primary  im-

Figure 4. Household types identified  in eight county sample surveys through cluster analysis.

<!-- image -->

portance. In addition to this source of income, these  households have  more  working family members, less contracted land, and minimal agricultural sales.  This  cluster  represents a  new type of  peasant  household which,  except for location, could easily be considered to be like the households  of suburban industrial workers. These  households,  the  most dramatically  different among households in the rural areas in Jiangsu,  might be called 'Industrially  Focused' households.  The 'Industrially  Focused' households represent 27 percent (45) of the sample.

While  the  principal  purpose  of  the  PCA/

clustering  procedure  was  to assign  membership to each  household,  there  are  significant spatial  patterns  which  should  not  be  overlooked. Figure 4  indicates the  location  in the prefecture of the families within each household type. In some cases, the pattern is exactly what would be expected by researchers  familiar with Jiangsu.  Of all households in the 'lndustrially Focused' household type, 71  percent are in Suzhou. Similarly, 55 percent o f the households  within the 'Agriculturally Focused' group are in Huaiyin. Household types for  these locations are  relatively  homogeneous. For  the

other  prefectures, this  is  not the  case.  There are  households from almost every county  in each of the groups. These distributions reflect the diversity of  household types in any  given Multiple household types in most villages  imply  disparities in income and location (Table 5). opportunities.

These different  household types report significantly  different  levels of  income, different sources of  that  income, and different  demographic  characteristics.  The  total  annual  income for 'industrially  Focused'  households is almost  double  that  of  households relying on agriculture. Per-capita income for these more affluent households is 57 percent greater than for  the  'Agriculturally Focused'  households. The 'intermediate' group  not only  has procured more industrial employment, but has expanded agricultural sales as well. With respect to the goals of  provincial leaders which stress maintaining high farm output,  improving efficiency and raising family income, these  intermediate households  might be considered most successful.

## Conclusion

The  complex  and varied manner  in which Chinese farm families earn their incomes raises significant structural and spatial questions. The opportunities and possibilities  of earning money in different regions  of Jiangsu  Province and, by extension, China vary greatly. These opportunities reflect the extraordinary, pervasive  influence of  the economic  reforms and adjustments of the last decade  on  farming and related rural-based activities.  These  income  patterns also  indicate  a  wide-ranging  set  of  opportunities off  the farms,  as  many  farmers in periurban zones and even in more remote areas avail themselves of industrial job opportunities that appear to offer higher incomes.

Jiangsu Province is clearly special in that  it, and certainly its southern region (Sunan), represents one of China's  most economically advanced  and  rapidly  developing  regions. It  should be viewed as  unusual  in the  degree of commercialization of agriculture, the degree of development of transportation and communication  linkages,  the  size  and  complexity  of  its urban markets  and marketing networks and the levels of demand that exist among both urban and rural consumers. Given those conditions,

Jiangsu  also represents  what China's future may hold  for less developed regions  in  the country's interior. The differences seen among the four prefectures and eight counties is itself striking, and it is more complex than a purely urban and rural, or southern Jiangsu  and northern Jiangsu, pattern.

Clearly the farmers closer to the thriving city of  Suzhou are the  most prosperous, but one musk ask  if in fact they are truly farmers. Since the bulk of their income is derived from nonfarm activities, this raises serious  questions  about the true nature of their livelihood and lifestyles. For example, in Suzhou  Prefecture off-farm agricultural sales constituted only 2.7  percent of annual  total  income among the  farmers surveyed.  industrial  income  is  also  important  in Nantong and  Nanjing Prefectures, which  indicates that those areas along Jiangsu's east coast and mouth of the Yangtze River may be benefitting from  their  proximity  to water  transportation and China's  greatest industrial  city, Shanghai.  This  Nantong  region  is  obviously changing quickly,  and  the  manner  in which this farmers  here  earn  their livings  reflect change.

Nanjing  Prefecture  offers  a  sharp  contrast because its nearby  farmers  seem to  follow more traditional patterns and are less drawn into the alluring  urban/industrial employment  orbit. Liuhe County, the county seat  of  which  is 36 km north of the Yangtze River, especially exhibits a  more traditional/less  commercialized rural pattern. This description reflects its more remote location from the  large urban market of  Nanjing and its less  well-developed  transportation system.  Finally,  it seems  clear  that Huaiyin Prefecture is a  less  advanced region and presents a different kind of place. At once less wealthy, its family size on average is larger, and these families  rely far more heavily  on  farming  and related activities, although some derive substantial income from other  kinds of activities such as services.

Farmers above all want to increase their  incomes,  and the entire family will be involved in strategies to attain this goal. These farmers discover where the greatest advantages are and where the best opportunities  lie. Often these opportunities are not to be found on the farm for  the  main breadwinners. Traditional  rowcropping,  especially  for  food grains,  does not yield  high incomes because of  the comparatively  low prices offered for  grain and thus  a

low return for this type of farming. Production of cash crops  such as ramie  or other specialized sideline  activities  such as raising  geese or chickens provide more income. Even better may be the opportunity to drive a truck or  develop a wholesale  vending  operation  involving  some specialized good  or  commodity  needed in a distant city. Finally, factory work in  a rural collective or  perhaps some  nearby market town attracts many farmers. This attraction is a major first step in the social change and urbanizing of many of China's peasants.

## China's Development Path: The Iiangsu Model

The  evidence presented here,  despite the socialist context, suggests a pattern of economic change in Jiangsu  that appears to be following the  neoclassical model of  structural  shift with,  perhaps,  special  East  Asian and Chinese conditions  (Lewis  1955;  Fei  and  Ranis  1964; Chenery and Sryquin 1975; Oshima 1983;  Xue 1986). Incomes are rising, and peasants are taking non-farming jobs to supplement their  incomes. In some cases,  as  in Suzhou and Nantong,  the  farming  activities  have  become negligible or secondary a s   peasants hold onto the land but lose their enthusiasm  for farming. This  pattern  suggests  the  kind  of  part-time farming going on in Japan or  Taiwan and indicates that Oshima's (1983)  model of East Asian industrial transition  is valuable in anticipating current and future  changes in China,  despite the difference  of  a socialist path to development.  It further  suggests  that  China's  industrialization,  with  it s  focus  on  peri-urban  and suburban as well as rural location, may simply be a variation on the traditional theme of  industrialization cum urbanization and not a distinctive,  special form of development (Perkins and Yusuf 1984;  Zweig 1987).

We close by returning to the three main hypotheses posed earlier in the paper: (1)  higher rural family  incomes in Jiangsu are generated by off-farm employment; (2) higher incomes  of farm families are associated with proximity  to main  commercial centers; and  (3)  distinctive rural  household types  can  be  identified in the province. Two of these three working hypotheses are accepted.  We have demonstrated empirically that the greatest contribution to farm income  in Jiangsu typically  comes  from  employment that is off-farm,  especially industrial or  service  jobs.  Location  near  major  market centers, while important,  is not clearly associated with higher income. The pattern is more complex and likely reflects the nature of  existing transport networks and possibly a variety of other social and personal linkages. Euclidean distance  to main  market  centers  or distant cities i s  not the simple answer, and thus there is insufficient evidence to accept the second hypothesis. Three distinct household types were identified through  cluster  analysis.  The  first two-subsistence and  the  mixed  diversified types-comported well  with  the  conceptual model of Weitz discussed above  which posited a  sequential shift  from  subsistence  to  mixed diversified to specialized farming. In  Jiangsu  all three  of  these  types were  identified and associated  with specific  farm families, which were further described and typed according to how they earned their  incomes. Yet there appears to  be  some uncertainty about the  wealthier and more specialized  families. In  many cases, as noted,  it was  not clear  if  in fact  these should be considered farm households since so  much of their income is derived from nonfarm sources.

What kind of farmer does China really want? Is the specialized farmer with a higher degree of efficiency in  producing  a specialized  crop or product the  model of the future? If so,  what will happen to those farmers who are less successful?  Will they be pushed into other kinds of  service or  industrial  activities? Where  will these people live and how will they obtain their food grain ration? There are  obviously many questions  about  the  direction  and  pace  of China's path to agricultural modernization as a facet of structural shift.

At the same time the question as to the success  and efficacy of  rural and agricultural  reform must be raised. If the government's main goal is to produce more  food grain in the most efficient  manner,  it  does  not  appear  to  be working in some of China's most advanced regions,  despite the well known representation of  these  regions as  centers of  advanced agricultural development. The peasants only perform what  is necessary to satisfy government quotas s o   that  they  may  keep  the  land (Han 1988). On the other  hand,  if the government in  fact is most interested in  maximizing  incomes and improving the well-being and livelihoods of  its rural population,  the policies would appear to be successful. Of special interest is the manner in which modernization is proceeding

in  a sort of quasi-urbanizing of some peasants. This approach may well represent an interesting and feasible  solution to  the question of the massive transfer  of  rural  population  and the creation of super cities.

This possiblesolution has been embodied recently in the formal policy of 'Litu  bulixiang' (Leave the land but not the township or village) (Zhu 1986). What results is an in situ partial urbanizing of  rural people who remain in rural townships and  take  up  nonfarm  sector  employment  without  migrating  to cities.  Other peasant families remain in part  rooted to the soil and still produce food even if not too efficiently.  China thus may  have discovered its own middle ground, wherein many rural families begin the sometimes difficult  process of adapting to nonfarm sector jobs and partially urban styles  of  life,  but  in very  familiar  surroundings and with little investment in infrastructure. The unanswered  question, of course, is,  what is the long-term effect o f such a policy and trend on the efficiency of production when factors such as labor and  capital have  state-controlled limits on their  mobility.

## Acknowledgments

The authors wish to acknowledge the generous financial  support  of  the  Committee  on  Scholarly Communication with the People's Republic of China (National Academy  of  Sciences)  and  the  National Geographic  Society  for making  this research  possible. Zhang Xigu and Wang Shaohua of Nanjing Agricultural University provided wise and generous counsel and support during Veeck's field work in  China. J. 0. Wheeler and Ronald Mitchelson of the University of Georgia offered thoughtful comments on the statistical approach  and the manuscript, for which we are grateful. Annals editor  Stanley Brunn and his anonymous reviewers held us to rigorous standards, and we appreciate their thoughtful and constructive efforts to improve this study. Any remaining  shortcomings are our own responsibility. Finally, Dorothy Osborn, Audrey Hawkins, and Maudrie Eldridge typed and corrected a number of iterations of this manuscript,and we thank them for their skills  on the wordprocessing  system.

## Notes

- 1 . A good review of Weitz is contained  in Todaro (1985).
- 2 . The study was  supported  by the Committee on Scholarly Communication with the People's  Republic  of  China (National Academy of  Sciences)
- and the National  Geographic  Society.  The Chinese Ministry of Education  approved the project, and the  Department of  Agromony  of  Nanjing Agricultural University  and its  former department head, Professor Zhang Xigu, were the in-country sponsors.
- 3 . Conditions  for  doing  foreign  field  research  in China,  especially  where  systematic  survey  research is involved, are very difficult. The selection of the farmers to be interviewed was done by the Chinese hosts, with only limited input by the investigator other than  general location. The sample obviously is non-random.
4. One Chinese yuan (dollar) equals .27 U.S.
- 5 . One mu equals 1/15 of a hectare  or 1/ 6 of an  acre.

## References

- Chenery,  Hollis. 1979. Structural change and development policy. New York: Oxford University Press (for the World Bank).

- ,

- and Sryquin, Moises. 1975. Patterns of development, 7950-1970. London: Oxford University Press (for the World Bank).
- Cheng, Lu. 1987. Lun woguo liangshi shengchang jinyibu fazhan wenti. [A discussion  of the problems of  advancing grain production in China.] lingji Dili [Economic Geography] 7( 2 ) : 8 3 - 8 7 .
- Chow, Gregory C. 1987. Development of a more market-oriented economy  in  China.  Science 235(4786):295-99.
- Crook, Frederick W. 1986. The reform of the commune system and the rise of the township-collective-household  system.  In China's  economy looks toward the year 2000,  ed.  Joint Economic Committee, pp. 354-75. Washington: U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- Editorial  Committee. 1987. liangsu jingji nianjian, 1986. [Nanjing  economic  yearbook.]  Nanjing: Nanjing People's Publishers.
- Fei,  Hsiao Tung (Fei Xiaotong). 1983. Chinese village closeup. Beijing: New World Press.
- Fei,  J.C.H., and  Ranis,  C. 1964. Development of the  labor  surplus  economy: Theory  and  policy.  New Haven,  CT: Yale University Press.
- Han, Baocheng. 1988. Grain production: Today and tomorrow. Beijing Review 3 1 ( 6 ) : 7 .
- Jackson, Barbara B. 1983. Multivariate  data analysis: An introduction. Homewood, IL: Irwin Publishing Company.
- Lardy, Nicholas R. 1986. Overview: Agricultural reform and the rural economy. In  China's economy looks toward the year 2000,  ed. Joint Economic Committee, pp. 325-35. Washington: U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- Lewis, W.  A. 1955. The theory of economic  growth. Homewood, IL: Irwin Publishing  Company.
- Liu, Guoguang; Wensen, Liang, et  ai. 1987. China's economy in 2000. Beijing: New World Press.

- Oi, Jean  C. 1986. Peasant grain marketing and state procurement: China's grain contracting system. China Quarterly 106:272-90.
- Oshima,  Harry. 1983. The  industrial  and  demographic transition in East Asia. Population  a n d  Development Review 9(4):583-607.
- Perkins, Dwight, and Yusuf,  Shaid. 1984. Ruraldevelopment  in China.  Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press (A World Bank Publication).
- Rothenberg, Jerome. 1987. Space,  interregional economic  relations,  and  structural  reform  in China. International  Regional  Science  Review 1  l(1): 5-22.
- Sunan  jianwei  nongyeh  xiandaihua  qu  [Southern Jiangsu establishes modern  experimental  farm regions]. 1988. Renmin Ribao (People's  Daily), January 29, p. 1.
- Todaro, Michael P. 1985. Economic  development  in the Third World,  3rd ed.  New York: Longman.
- Travers,  lee. 1984.  Post-I978 rural economic policy and peasant income in  China. China  Quarterly - . 98:241-59.

1986. Peasant non-agricultural production in the  People's  Republic  of  China.  In China's economy looks toward the year  2000, ed.  Joint Economic Committee, pp. 376-86. Washington: U.S.  Government Printing Office.

Weitz,  Raanan. 1971. From  peasant to farmer: A rev-

- olutionary strategy  for  development.  New York: Columbia University Press.
- Wiens,  Thomas B. 1982. The limits to agricultural intensification: The Suzhou experience. In  China under the four modernizations, ed. Joint  Economic  Committee,  Pr. 1, pp. 462-74. Washington: U.S.  Government Printing Office.
- Wu, Jinliang. 1987. Wuxi xian liangshi shengchan di shidu guimo: Fazhan buzhou ji duice. [Appropriate scale for grain production  in  Wuxi County: Developing correct steps.] Paper presented at a Research Meeting, Nanjing Agricultural University,  October 20.
- Xue,  Muqiao. 1986. China's  socialist economy,  rev. ed. Beijing: Foreign Language Press.
- Zhu, Tonghua. 1986. Lun Litu bulixiang.  [Report on "Leave the land but not the township"]. In Jiangsu jingji  nianjian [Nanjing economic yearbook], p. viii, 21. Nanjing: Nanjing People's  Publishing House.
- Zweig, David. 1987. From  village  to  city: Reforming urban rural relations in China.  lnternational Regional Science Review 11(1):43-58.
- . 1985. Peasants, ideology,and new incentive systems:  Jiangsu Province, 1978-81. In Chinese rural  development, the  great  transformation, ed. W. L. Parish, pp. 141-63. Armonk, N.Y.:  M.  E. Sharpe.