This article was downloaded by: [Laurentian University]

On: 07 October 2014, At: 02:38

Publisher: Routledge

Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered office: Mortimer House,

37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK

<!-- image -->

## Annals of the Association of American Geographers

Publication details, including instructions for authors and subscription information: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/raag20

## From Crops to Concrete: Urbanization, Deagriculturalization, and Construction Material Mining in Central Mexico

Matthew Fry a

a Department of Geography , University of North Texas

Published online: 27 Jul 2011.

To cite this article: Matthew Fry (2011) From Crops to Concrete: Urbanization, Deagriculturalization, and Construction Material Mining in Central Mexico, Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 101:6, 1285-1306, DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2011.584289

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2011.584289

## PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE

Taylor &amp; Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the 'Content') contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor &amp; Francis, our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors, and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor &amp; Francis. The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims, proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content.

This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing, systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &amp; Conditions of access and use can be found at http:// www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-and-conditions

## From Crops to Concrete: Urbanization, Deagriculturalization, and Construction Material Mining in Central Mexico

Matthew Fry

Department of Geography, University of North Texas

In tropical countries, urbanization and rural deagriculturalization are intimately linked processes. Growth of the construction industry, which draws labor and materials from rural and periurban areas, is a key component of rural-urban interactions. Using a case study from the Perote Valley, Mexico, this article analyzes how urbandriven concrete aggregate mining affects rural agricultural lands and livelihoods. Land-cover changes associated with aggregate surface mining were examined by comparing aerial photographs, satellite images, and Global Positioning System field maps of the valley. In addition, sixty-six formal household interviews were conducted in three agrarian communities. Results indicate that between 1995 and 2006, mine surface area quadrupled, from 181 to 706 hectares, and the spatial distribution of surface mines followed a predictable pattern of extraction, from most to least accessible. Numerous factors persuaded farmers to convert fields to mines, including increased prices for aggregates, consumerist desires for new homes, and declining returns to agriculture. Moreover, farmers believed they could or would recultivate mined land following extraction. Yet, in 2006, among the three agrarian communities, 202 (45 percent) of the 482 hectares of agricultural land extracted were not recultivated. Although deep mines were more likely to be abandoned, findings suggest that land revalorization occurred among farmers, with the scarcity value of nonrenewable aggregates gradually surpassing the land's agricultural value. In the long term, diminished agricultural potential resulting from widespread mine abandonment might drive farmers to migrate to cities for employment, creating a positive feedback between urban demand for construction aggregates and mining of agricultural fields. Key Words: construction aggregate mining, deagrarianization, land-use change, livelihoods, rural-urban interactions.

在热带国家，城市化和农村的去农业化是紧密联系的过程。建筑业的增长，从农村和城郊地区取得劳力和材料，是城乡 互动的重要组成部分。使用从墨西哥佩罗谷的案例研究，本文分析城市如何带动建筑总开采对农村的农业土地和生计的 影响。通过比较航空照片，卫星图像和全球定位系统的谷地地图，本文研究与总露天采矿有关的土地覆盖变化。此外， 总结了对三个农业社区.66家的采访。结果表明，1995年至2006年间，矿井面积从181到706公顷翻了两番，地表矿 的空间分布从最大到最小的可通达性遵循可预测的提取模式。许多因素说服农民把上地转化成矿井，包括建筑采矿价格 的上涨，消费者对新房的欲望，和农业回归者的减少。然而，在2006年，在这三个农村社区里，482公顷农地中的202 公顷（45%）未被重新耕种。虽然深矿更有可能被抛弃，但研究结果表明，随着不可再生的总稀缺价值逐渐超过了上地 的农业价值量，农户土地价格重新得到控制。从长远米看，因为广泛的充矿导致的下降的农业潜力，可能驱动农民迁移 到城市就业，在城市建设总量需求和农业土地采矿之间产生一种积极的反馈。关键词：建筑总采矿，去农业化，土地利 用的变化，生计，城乡互动。

En los pa´ ıses tropicales, la urbanizaci´ on y desagriculturizaci´ on rural son procesos ´ ıntimamente ligados. El crecimiento de la industria de la construcci´ on, que atrae la mano de obra y materiales de las zonas rurales y periurbanas es un componente clave de las interacciones urbano-rurales. Usando un estudio del caso del Valle de Perote, M´ exico, este art´ ıculo analiza c´ omo la miner´ ıa de agregados de construcci´ on, impulsada por la urbanizaci´ on, afecta a las tierras agr´ ıcolas rurales y los medios de subsistencia. Los cambios de la cobertura de la tierra asociados con la miner´ ıa de agregados a cielo abierto, fueron analizados mediante la comparaci´ on de fotograf´ ıas a´ ereas, im´ agenes satelitales y mapas de campo del valle levantados con el Sistema Global de Posicionamiento. Adem´ as, se llevaron a cabo sesenta y seis entrevistas formales en los hogares de tres comunidades agrarias. Los resultados indican que entre 1995 y 2006, la superficie minera se cuadruplic´ o, de 181 a 706 hect´ areas, y la distribuci´ on espacial de minas a cielo abierto sigui´ o un patr´ on predecible de extracci´ on, de mayor a menor accesibilidad. Numerosos factores convencieron a los agricultores a convertir los campos a minas, incluyendo el aumento de

los precios de los agregados, deseos consumistas de nuevos hogares, y rendimientos decrecientes en la agricultura. Es m´ as, los agricultores cre´ ıan que podr´ ıan volver a cultivar en la tierra de la mina despu´ es de la extracci´ on. Sin embargo, en el 2006 de las tres comunidades agrarias, 202 (45 por ciento) de las 482 hect´ areas de tierras agr´ ıcolas extra´ ıdas no fueron cultivadas nuevamente. A pesar de que las minas profundas eran m´ as propensas a ser abandonadas, los hallazgos sugieren que la revalorizaci´ on de la tierra se produjo entre los agricultores, con el escaso valor de los agregados no renovables superando poco a poco el valor agr´ ıcola de la tierra. A largo plazo, el potencial agr´ ıcola disminuido producto del abandono generalizado de minas podr´ ıa impulsar a los agricultores a emigrar a las ciudades en busca de empleo, creando una positiva retroalimentaci´ on entre la demanda urbana por agregados de construcci´ on y la miner´ ıa en campos agr´ ıcolas. Palabras clave: miner´ ıa de agregados de construcci´ on, desagrarizaci´ on, cambios de uso del suelo, medios de subsistencia, interacciones urbano-rurales.

The richest crop for any field Is a crop of bricks for it to yield. The richest crop that it can grow, Is a crop of houses in a row.

-English jingle from the 1870s (in Jackson 1985, 305)

T he process of urbanization is a leading cause of global environmental change (Kalnay and Cai 2003; Lambin, Geist, and Lepers 2003; Grimm et al. 2008), with the highest rates of urban growth occurring in tropical countries (United Nations Population Fund 2007). Here, rapid urbanization is observable in an expanding built environment (L´ opez et al. 2001; Liu et al. 2005; Seto and Fragkias 2005; Li, Chen, and Sun 2007; Grimm et al. 2008) characterized by horizontal growth of low-income, informal settlements around cities (World Bank 2001; United Nations Human Settlements Programme 2003; Davis 2006). As farmers migrate to work and live in these peripheral areas, an associated process of deagriculturalization (or deagrarianization) occurs in rural areas (Araghi 1995; Bryceson 1996; Lobao and Meyer 2001). One important aspect of the linkage between urbanization and agricultural change is the transfer of labor from rural farming to urban construction (Firman 1991; Ramsaran and Hosein 2006). Another less well understood component is the relationship between urban demand for construction materials and rural landscape transformation. This article uses empirical data to analyze the impacts of construction material extraction, a fast-growing but understudied land use, on rural livelihoods and landscapes in the tropics.

Aside from studies on urban fringe environments and urban encroachment, research on urbanization in the tropics has focused on rural land-use/land-cover changes resulting from two urban-related processes: outmigration and multilocalization. Some research shows that forests regenerate when farmers abandon agricultural plots and move to cities (i.e., forest transition theory; Grau et al. 2003; Wright and Muller-Landau 2006; Par´ es-Ramos, Gould, and Aide 2008). In other instances, abandoned fields are converted to less intensive land uses such as pasture (Harden 1996; Wiggins et al. 2002), tree-based systems (Browder and Pedlowski 2000; Rudel, Bates, and Machinguiashi 2002), or fallow (Wiegers et al. 1999). Studies also show that in lieu of abandonment, many rural households become multilocalized (or multisited) in an effort to diversify their livelihoods (Bryceson 1996; Zoomers and Kleinpenning 1996; Rigg 1998; Reardon, Berdegu´ e, and Escobar 2001). Multilocalized households depend on multiple income sources in addition to traditional agriculture, and their land-use strategies might reflect the inputs of remittance monies (McKay 2005) or the urbanite lifestyle demands of nonlocal members (Padoch et al. 2008). Urban demand for nonagricultural and nontimber resources, such as mined construction materials, is also recognized as a major driver of rural land-use change in the tropics (Lambin, Geist, and Lepers 2003; Grimm et al. 2008); however, to date, it has received relatively little attention (but see A. L. Singh and Asgher 2005).

Mined aggregates (sand, gravel, crushed stone) comprise approximately 80 percent of concrete, the most popular urban building material worldwide. As a result, large volumes of aggregates are extracted from surface deposits in rural and periurban areas to feed the building needs of rapidly expanding cities. In fact, global volumes of natural aggregate extraction rank with oil and coal (Douglas and Lawson 2002; Giles 2003) and, like oil and coal, aggregate consumption has increased precipitously since the beginning of the twentieth century (Wallwork 1974; Horvath 2004; Bolen 2008). As urban demand for aggregates continues to grow, surface mining increasingly competes for space with other land uses, especially agriculture. For example, long famous for its cultivated landscapes (Whitmore and Turner 2001),

the highlands of central Mexico are renowned today for massive urban populations and sprawling cities that not only replace agricultural fields (Chambers et al. 2007) but also create new demand for rural resources such as concrete aggregates.

Like other tropical countries, Mexico has undergone a massive construction boom since the 1980s, and its smallholder farmers have experienced a concurrent agricultural bust. Due to federal policies and international trade agreements established in the late 1980s and early 1990s, smallholder farming has become increasingly nonviable, causing many farmers to engage in alternative land uses, seek off-farm employment, or emigrate (Cornelius and Myhre 1998; de Janvry and Sadoulet 2001; Wiggins et al. 2002; Hamilton, DeWalt, and Barkin 2003; Eakin 2005; Perramond 2008). River floodplains in low-lying areas and lacustrine basins in volcanic regions are two geographic landforms where agriculture and aggregate deposits often overlap. Although rural land managers have long extracted and produced construction materials from these deposits for local uses (e.g., West 1964, 1974; Williams 1972; Cook 1998), current demands present a new set of circumstances for Mexican farmers. Not only does the sale of aggregates provide a new income source for households but, due to the scale of extraction, the residual impacts of surface mining are more extensive. These include diminished soil quality (Lin et al. 2005), effects on biological diversity and nutrient cycling (Price, Milne, and Tynan 2005; Simmons et al. 2008), altered water retention capacities (Townsend et al. 2009), changed flow regimes (Khanal and Watanabe 2006), and high economic costs associated with reclamation activities (Wallwork 1974). Abandoned surface mines also leave legacy landscape features (i.e., deep, steep-sided pits) that limit subsequent land use, present safety hazards, and are generally considered visual blights (Milgrom 2008; Mouflis et al. 2008).

In spite of these negative economic and environmental effects, farmers in the Perote Valley of central Veracruz, Mexico, have been selling extraction rights to aggregates from below their agricultural fields since the late 1980s. Consequently, land use, land cover, and livelihoods in this region have changed. Researchers recognize that rural land change involves a complex array of socioeconomic and biophysical interactions (e.g., Blaikie and Brookfield 1987; Rindfuss et al. 2004; Fox and Vogler 2005; Turner, Lambin, and Reenberg 2007). Therefore, this study employs an integrated social, environmental, and geospatial approach to understand why farming households participate in the aggregate mar- ket and to analyze changes resulting from the region's transformation from agriculture to aggregate based. The following is a review of theoretical conceptualizations of the linkages among urbanization, agricultural change, and aggregate mining.

## Rural-Urban Interactions

## The Urbanization Process and Agricultural Change

The agricultural and industrial revolutions serve to illustrate the circular relationship between urbanization and agricultural change. Soja (2010) believes that the formation of the earliest cities and the development of agriculture are examples of mutual causality: Agricultural surplus was both an instrumental component and an outcome of city formation. A similar argument is put forth for industrial-driven urbanization in the nineteenth century, which can be viewed as both cause and consequence of agricultural change in Europe and the United States (Soja 2010). In 1845, Engels (1958) described this process in England. To him, fundamental changes in agriculture resulted from rapid industrialization in growing cities, better farm implements, and progress in science. Today, this is referred to simply as the urbanization process . In this circular model, mechanization and crop innovations lead to increased agricultural productivity, which, in turn, releases rural labor to work in a growing urban manufacturing sector. Enhanced agricultural productivity also supplies more food to growing urban populations. As a result, urban manufacturers devise more agricultural innovations, leading to greater agricultural productivity and further diminishing the need for agricultural workers (Knox and McCarthy 2005). Thus, labor is a central component of this process.

In neoclassical economics, the shift of the main labor force away from agriculture and into the nonagricultural sector is referred to as deagriculturalization (J. Singh and Dhillon 2004). For example, between 1900 and 1970, the percentage of the United States workforce employed in agriculture decreased from 41 percent to 4 percent (Dimitri, Effland, and Conklin 2005). As in England, it was through technological and scientific innovation (e.g., tractors, hybrid seeds, fertilizers, pesticides) that farmer labor was replaced with efficient, capital-intensive production (Fitzgerald 2003; Kloppenburg 2004). As a result, the number of farms decreased by 63 percent, and the average farm size rose by 67 percent (Dimitri, Effland, and Conklin 2005).

Moreover, the U.S. urban population grew from 40 percent of the total population in 1900 to 80 percent in 2000 (Dimitri, Effland, and Conklin 2005). Today, farmers make up less than 2 percent of the population, making the United States one of the most thoroughly deagriculturalized countries in the world. However, as Fitzgerald (2003) pointed out, 'the patterns of change set in the American case are now replaying all over the world' (189).

Common interpretations of late-twentieth-century agricultural change in the tropics suggest that, similar to the United States, the spread of industrial agriculture has also spurred a rural-to-urban population shift. Known colloquially as the green revolution , introduction of fertilizer and water-intensive agriculture to Mexico and India in the 1950 and 1960s, for example, was an important driver of rural outmigration (Griffin 1974; Hewett de Alc´ antara 1976; Cederroth and Gerdin 1986; Shiva 1991; Wilcox Young 1993). In addition, decentralization policies implemented during the 1980s and 1990s throughout Southeast Asia, Africa, and Latin America reduced subsidies for smallholder farms and increased economic support for export-oriented commercial production, furthering the drive toward agricultural industrialization and rural outmigration (Bryceson 2002; Eakin 2005; Rigg 2009). With interpretations such as these, cities in the tropics appear to be little more than repositories for rural laborers. Absent is any notion of the mutual causality suggested by Soja (2010) and summarized by the concept of the urbanization process. And, although McGee (1991, 39) pointed out that the Western paradigm of an urbanization process is 'clearly not transferable' to tropical countries, questions remain regarding the relationship between urbanization and agricultural change outside of Europe and the United States.

## Rural-Urban Households and Land Use in the Tropics

Livelihood and household-based studies conducted in the tropics show that deagrarianization not only leads to the physical abandonment of rural spaces but also to the reorganization of rural household livelihoods (Zoomers and Kleinpenning 1996; Bryceson 1996; Reardon, Berdegu´ e, and Escobar 2001; Rigg 1998). Driven by rising production costs and diminished returns for their products, smallholder farmers often rely on nonfarm income sources for their livelihoods (Bryceson 1996; de Janvry and Sadoulet 2001; Reardon, Berdegu´ e, and Escobar 2001; Wilson and Rigg 2003;

Eakin 2005; Goldstein, Childs, and Wangdui 2008). Many nonfarm income opportunities are located in urbanizing areas, creating a blurred boundary between rural and urban livelihoods (Bryceson 1996). To Wilson and Rigg (2003), this blurred boundary is part of a broader social and cultural shift that might ultimately destabilize the social utility of traditional farming. Rigg (1998) argued that the urban lifestyle, better educational opportunities, and greater exposure to Western media and culture often contend with rural land-use decisions. As a result, young household members migrate more frequently to work higher paying jobs in cities and increasingly view farming as an undesirable occupation. Meanwhile, older household members continue farming and must rely on economic support provided by the nonfarm incomes of their children, with unclear longterm outcomes for land-use strategies on the farm.

This multilocalization of household members and associated mobility between urban and rural labor markets affects rural land-use decisions and agricultural practices in subtle to obvious ways. In the Philippines, McKay (2005) found that remittances from female household members coupled with their lack of participation in agricultural decisions caused male heads of household to plant high-input, commercial instead of traditional subsistence crops. In the Amazon Basin, the managed forest fallows of multisited rural households have become dominated by fast-growing timber species used for inexpensive construction lumber that is in high demand in squatter settlements (Padoch et al. 2008). Although not a land-use study per se, Ramsaran and Hosien (2006) found that laborers in Trinidad and Tobago leave agriculture for construction jobs in cities when economic conditions are favorable and return to agriculture during economic downturns, suggesting that farming practices could intensify or deintensify accordingly. Similarly, Firman (1991) found that urban housing construction in Indonesia is an important source of employment for multilocal, agricultural households.

This study shows that urban-driven demand for concrete aggregates contributes to rural landscape transformation through the extraction and production of these materials. Aggregate surface mining modifies land cover in two phases: extraction and postextraction. Extraction begins with removal of vegetation, soil, and overburden (i.e., material overlying the deposit; Simmons et al. 2008; Douglas and Lawson 2002). Extraction then proceeds until the deposit is exhausted or to the depth limit of the extractive technology (Wallwork 1974). With the termination of extraction activities, mines are reclaimed or abandoned. In its most basic form,

reclamation entails replacement and grading of the original surface material, but reclamation can take a number of different forms. For example, mines near cities are often incorporated into the fabric of urban areas or converted into parks (Arbogast, Knepper, and Langer 2000). In other instances, surface mines are converted into refuse dumps, reservoirs, or sites for industrial plants (Colten 1994; Milgrom 2008). In rural agricultural areas, mines are sometimes recultivated or used for pasture. This last example highlights how land use can transition from agriculture to aggregate mining and potentially back to agriculture or else to another land use.

## Background

Mexico's rapidly urbanizing population and persistent legacy of agrarian reform provides an intriguing setting to examine the relationship between urbanization and agricultural change. Since the 1970s, Mexico's urban population has grown nearly threefold, from about 28 to about 79 million, and from approximately 60 percent to 76 percent of the total population (Instituto Nacional de Estadist´ ıca y Geograf´ ıa [INEGI] n.d.). A boom in urban construction has accompanied this urban population growth, as evidenced by the fivefold increase in the volume of concrete aggregates extracted from 1970 to 2003 (Gonz´ alez-Mart´ ınez and Schandl 2008).

Although the majority of Mexico's population is urban, 20 percent still participates in agriculture (INEGI n.d.). This relatively high percentage of farmers (i.e., compared to the United States) is partially due to the existence and persistence of the Mexican ejido , a collective form of land ownership that came into being as a result of the Mexican Revolution (1910-1921). No two ejidos are alike, but ejido members ( ejidatarios ) typically own individual parcels of land and often collectively manage communal forests or rangeland. Thus, ejidos are both geographic spaces and social institutions. Although government support for the ejido sector fluctuated throughout the twentieth century, today more than 50 percent of Mexico's agricultural land and about 70 percent of its forests are controlled by 3.2 million ejidatarios on 29,951 ejidos (Cornelius and Myhre 1998).

Nonetheless, since the 1990s, agriculture has become an increasingly nonviable income source for ejidatarios and their families (Hamilton, DeWalt, and Barkin 2003; Perramond 2008). In 1992, ejido structure underwent significant changes when the federal government amended Article 27 (the Agrarian Law)

of Mexico's constitution. Changes to Article 27 allowed ejidatarios to acquire land titles, which they could then sell. Prior to 1992, neither ejido titles nor land could be sold; instead, title and land were left to one heir. Although originally put in place as a guard against land reconsolidation, it also meant that most ejidatario offspring wound up landless (Cornelius 1998). Changes to Article 27 also allowed ejidos to establish joint ventures with private companies and officially ended further distribution of land to ejidos (Cornelius 1998). Although these changes brought new opportunities to ejido members, they also signaled a shift in government support for smallholder farming. With Mexico's entrance into the 1993-1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the government curtailed farm subsidies and ended low-interest credit, crop insurance, and guaranteed prices for agricultural products. 1

Studies suggest that many livelihood and land-use adaptations on ejidos resulted from these structural policy shifts (see, e.g., Cornelius 1998; Wiggins et al. 2002; Abizaid and Coomes 2004; Eakin 2005; King 2007; Keleman, Hellin, and Bellon 2009). Of particular interest, nonfarm incomes now account for approximately 55 percent of Mexico's rural incomes (de Janvry and Sadoulet 2001) and have become the backbone of many rural economies. For many Mexicans, a primary source of nonfarm income is the booming construction sector. Like agriculture, construction is labor intensive and has few barriers to entry (Ball and Connolly 1987). Schteingart and Sol´ ıs (1994) estimated that at least 50 percent of Mexican construction laborers are informal, with the vast majority of their labor directed toward urban housing construction (Connolly 1982). Currently, the largest share of Mexico's urban growth occurs in medium-sized cities (Garza 1999; Aguilar, Graizbord, and S´ anchez 1996). These cities not only draw labor from rural communities but also increasingly draw on small-scale construction material mines otherwise utilized for the building needs of rural towns and communities. In this way, rural areas and traditional agricultural communities become incorporated into expanding urban construction material markets. What remains unclear is at what point and for what reasons construction material extraction replaces agriculture as a land-use activity.

## Research Questions

Despite rapid urbanization and high consumption of concrete aggregates in tropical countries, little research

has been conducted on the factors underlying aggregate miningandcoupledlandandlivelihoodchangesinrural areas. In this article, I address this gap through an examination of rural land-use change within the broader context of mutual causality that links processes of urbanization to agricultural change. Using a case study from the highlands of central Veracruz, Mexico, this research asks: How is urban-driven aggregate mining related to rural agricultural change? More specifically, it addresses the following questions:

1. Whichareas are targeted for aggregate mining and why?
2. Why do households convert agricultural fields to aggregate mines?
3. How are mines utilized postextraction and what influences postextraction land use?

## Data and Methods

## Study Region: Perote Valley, Mexico

Research was conducted in the Perote Valley, Mexico, because aggregate surface extraction is a prevalent and expanding land-use activity (Figure 1; Fry 2008a, 2008b). Since the mid-1990s, demand for the lightweight aggregate tepetzil has motivated many farmers here to mine and extract this resource from below agricultural fields. After tepetzil is extracted, much of it is processed into lightweight concrete blocks by local

Figure 1. (A) Photograph of an upslope recultivated tepetzil mine. Average tepetzil depth is 5.7 m and average mine depth 6.9 m. Photograph is toward the north with Los Humeros in the background. (B) Photograph of an active valley-bottom tepetzil mine that was later abandoned. Tepetzil is the bottom deposit. Average tepetzil depth is 8.2 m and average mine depth is 13.9 m. Photograph is toward the south. Cofre de Perote (4,282 m) is in the background. Photographs taken by the author in 2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Table 1. General information on study ejidos

| Ejido          |   Year established | Population 2006   |   Ejidatarios 2006 |   Total land area (ha) |
|----------------|--------------------|-------------------|--------------------|------------------------|
| Sierra de Agua |               1925 | ∼ 3,000           |                 93 |                    966 |
| Los Molinos    |               1934 | ∼ 6,000           |                102 |                  1,819 |
| Cruz Blanca    |               1925 | 740               |                 36 |                    511 |

block-making facilities known as bloqueras. Although tepetzil deposits are located throughout the Perote Valley, much of the mining activity is concentrated in three once predominantly agricultural ejido communities: Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca (Table 1).

Aggregate mining increased in the Perote Valley in the mid-1980s when concrete tepetzil blocks became popular building materials in the nearby and fastgrowing city of Xalapa, the capital of Veracruz State

(Figure 2). During the following decades, extraction paralleled Xalapa's expansion. The city's population grew from 212,796 in 1980 to more than 500,000 people in 2003, and its surficial area increased from about 1,736 to 4,745 ha (Capitanachi Moreno, Ultrera Barillas, and Smith 2004), creating large demand for building materials, especially lightweight tepetzil blocks (Fry 2008b). Another upsurge in demand began when provincial mines in Perote came under the radar of construction material distributors in such metropolitan areas as

Figure 2. Research area in central Mexico. (A) Inset, position of Neovolcanic Belt in relation to urban sources of demand. (B) Faby Tuff deposit in 2006 (tan) and study area with tepetzil mines in 2006 (orange). Black line indicates profile. (C) Study area outlined in yellow, the extent of the IKONOS images, with tepetzil mines and three study ejidos indicated. Black line indicates profile. (D) Schematic profile from northwest (left) and southeast (right) showing deep mines in valley and shallower mines upslope. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Mexico City, Puebla, and Monterrey. Since 2000, increasing amounts of tepetzil blocks have been distributed throughout central Mexico; blocks now can be found as far north as Nuevo Laredo near the U.S.-Mexico border and as far south as Cancun along the Yucat´ an Peninsula.

The Perote Valley is located in the eastern portion of the Mexican Neovolcanic Belt in the arid highlands of central Veracruz State (Figure 2). The area is characterized by a variable climate, because of its location near the escarpment of the Sierra Madre Oriental Range. Due to a rain shadow effect, mean annual rainfall decreases substantially from east to west across the study region, from 1,106 mm to 482 mm. Dry for most of the year, the wettest months are April, May, September, and October (Comisi´ on Nacional del Agua n.d.). Mean annual temperatures also vary with elevation. The city of Perote (2415 m above sea level) averages 12.6 ◦ Cand communities at 2,938 m above sea level average 9.9 ◦ C.

Rain-fed agriculture has long been practiced in this region, although well irrigation has increased in recent years. In terms of area cultivated and tons harvested, maize ( Zea mays ) is the principal cultivar, followed by common beans ( Phaseolus vulgaris ), fava beans ( Vicia faba ), and wheat ( Triticum spp.; OEIDRUS Veracruz 2006). Along the northwestern slopes of Cofre de Perote, agriculture is interspersed with pine-oak forest patches comprised of Pinus montezumae , Pinus teocote , Pinus pseudostrobus , Pinus pseudostrobus var oaxacana , and Quercus crassifolia (Mart´ ınez 2003).

The large stratovolcano, Cofre de Perote (4,282 m above sea level), is the most prominent feature in the area. Northwest of it lies the less visible but geologically important Los Humeros Volcanic Center. Eruptive deposits from Los Humeros make up much of the surface geology in the Perote Valley (Ferriz and Mahood 1984). Three major eruptive events occurred at Los Humeros after 500,000 BP. The first eruptive event occurred about 460,000 BP and created the 21 km × 15 km Los Humeros caldera (Figure 2; Ferriz and Mahood 1984). The second major event occurred in stages beginning around 240,000 BP and is collectively known as Faby Tuff. The third major event occurred between 100,000 and 60,000 BP. Faby Tuff, colloquially called tepetzil, is a sequence of air-fall deposits characterized by good sorting, internal stratification, distinguishable fall units, and a systematic decrease in thickness and maximum and median grain size away from the source (Sparks and Wright 1979). These characteristics make tepetzil a more desirable construction aggregate (e.g., sorted aggregates do not require mechanized sorting, which is an added cost) and allow for its use in diverse products (e.g., small and medium tepetzil are used for construction aggregates, and tepetzil larger than 5 cm in diameter are used in the textile industry).

## Data Sources

Spatial analysis of tepetzil surface mining and landuse change in the Perote Valley was conducted using four georeferenced orthophotographs (2 m resolution), three georeferenced IKONOS satellite images (4 m resolution with four spectral bands), and Global Positioning System (GPS) field mapping. Orthophotos were obtained for March and May 1995. IKONOS images were acquired for 14 April 2003, 13 July 2003, and 16 November 2004. GPS data were recorded from August to November 2006. Together, the IKONOS images cover an area of ∼ 228 km 2 and make up the entire study area. These images contain most known tepetzil mines in the region. They also encompass Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca ejidos.

The satellite images were orthorectified using a digital elevation model (DEM) produced from a 1:50,000 topographic map (INEGI 1995), which was manually digitized. The images are high resolution and photograph-comparable and have a positional accuracy of less than 15 m, with the 4-m resolution setting the limit of discernible features. The 1995 orthophotos include the entire study region and have a positional accuracy of ± 12.5 m with the 2-m resolution setting the limit of discernible features. Comparisons between the 1995 orthophotos, the 2003-2004 IKONOS images, and 2006 field mapping were made within ArcGIS 9: ArcMap 9.3 (ESRI 2008). Within the images, landcover types were classified based on field observations.

## Field Mapping: Mine Distribution and Mine Characteristics

In 2006, 102 mined areas, approximately 99 percent of mined areas in the region, were identified and mapped. GPS was used to record point coordinates at corners and angles around mine perimeters. In addition, mine depth was measured at various points within each mine, but these were not recorded at regular intervals due to inconsistent accessibility. Overburden depth (i.e., depth from the surface to the top of the tepetzil deposit) and soil depth were also recorded. From these data, mean depth per mine as well as volume of material extracted, tepetzil volume, and overburden volume were calculated.

Land use within each mine was categorized as active, abandoned, postextraction agriculture, tree plantation, bloquera, or other. Each mine was also assigned an extraction date (i.e., year mine extraction began) using one of two methods. First, extraction dates were obtained by comparing the 2006 field mapping data with the 1995 orthophotos and 2003-2004 IKONOS images, which provided benchmarks. It is possible that some of the mined areas classified as 1995 and 2003-2004 were in fact mined prior to those years. Therefore, key informants, including front-end-loader operators, dumptruck drivers, and land owners also provided extraction dates.

Polygons of individual mines were created in ArcMap by overlaying point data for mined areas onto the 1995 orthophotos and 2003-2004 IKONOS images. Data on minecharacteristics were incorporated into the polygon attributes. In ArcMap, the elevation of each mine was determined using a DEM and the distance of each mine to the nearest paved road was calculated by creating 100-m buffers around all paved roads and determining the intersection between the buffers and mine polygons. MEX140 is the principle road running through the valley and bisects valley bottom and hillslope geographical zones. Mines located southeast of MEX140 were classified as upslope mines, whereas mines located to the northwest of MEX140 were classified as valley bottom mines (Figure 2D).

Due to logistical issues and privacy concerns, ownership titles were not assigned to individual land parcels. As well, connectivity between mined areas meant that individual mines could not be identified. Therefore, during postprocessing of the mine data, the 102 mined areas observed in the field were subdivided into 303 mines based on postextraction land use, year extracted, and whether the mine was located on ejido or privately owned land. All analyses and all references to tepetzil mines are to the 303 mines.

## Land-Use/Land-Cover Change Detection

In addition to mapping tepetzil mine distribution and mine characteristics, ArcMap was used to create land-use/land-cover maps for Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca ejidos for 1995, 2003-2004, and 2006. Ejido boundaries were provided in polygon shapefile format by Mexico's Comisi´ on Nacional Forestal (CONAFOR). Based on combined field observations and visible distinctions observed in the aerial photos and IKONOS images, metric polygons of the following land-use and land-cover classes were generated for each of the three periods: agriculture, tree cover, inhab- ited/urban, tepetzil mine, and other. Data on the use of tepetzil mines in 2006 were also incorporated into the study ejido data set. Final land-cover maps for 1995, 2003-2004, and 2006 for each ejido provided area and percentage area data on land-use change from 1995 to 2006.

## Household Land-Use Survey

A formal questionnaire survey was conducted in Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca to (1) examine individual household land-use activities, (2) analyze why households elected to extract tepetzil from below agricultural fields, and (3) understand how tepetzil mining influenced household postextraction land-use decisions. Thirty-five households (38 percent) were randomly selected from ninety-three ejidatario households in Sierra de Agua, thirty-six from 102 ejidatarios in Los Molinos (35 percent), and fifteen from thirty-six (42 percent) ejidatarios in Cruz Blanca. A total of twenty-nine, thirty, and seven households ( n = 66), respectively, agreed to participate. Of the sixty-six ejidatario households interviewed, fifty-nine were ejidatarios in the early 1990s and seven received ejidatario titles after 1995.

In addition to household demographic information, survey respondents were asked to report land area and percentage of the area devoted to agriculture, plantation forestry, native forest, and abandoned or active tepetzil exploitation in the years 1990 and 2006. Households also provided data on the total number of agricultural plots sold for tepetzil as well as the year plots were sold. Respondents were asked how they perceived environmental impacts of tepetzil extraction and if they believed it affected soil and environmental quality. To determine how the allocation of land to the different land uses among households changed between 1990 and 2006, the mean and percentage area devoted to each land use was computed for all households. To complement the survey questionnaires, fourteen open-ended interviews were conducted with ejido presidents and other ejido authorities. Archival research, secondary data collection, and participant observations were conducted during the course of the study as well.

## Results

## Tepetzil Mine Geography

Between 1995 and 2006, the most significant landcover changes in the study area were the expansion of tepetzil mining and the decrease in agricultural land.

Across the Perote Valley, tepetzil mine area increased fourfold, from 181 ha in 1995 to 702 ha in 2006. In the three study ejidos, agricultural land decreased from 54 percent (1,771 ha) to 39 percent (1,289 ha) of the total surface area studied (Figure 3). Ninety-three percent (446 ha) of this loss in ejido agricultural land was due to tepetzil mining, with the remaining 7 percent (36 ha) resulting from conversion to alternate land uses (i.e., houses, tree cover, bloqueras). The most dramatic agriculture-to-tepetzil mine change occurred in Los Molinos, where 206 ha, or 26 percent, of the ejido's 1995 agricultural area (800 ha) was mined for tepetzil during the study period (Figure 3). Sierra de Agua had the largest percentage area of its agricultural land mined, 30 percent (156 ha).

Mean tepetzil deposit thickness, mean mine depth, and mean overburden depth all increased between 1995 and 2006 as extractors moved from thinner tepetzil deposits with shallow overburden to thicker deposits under deeper overburden (Figure 4). Mean distance from paved roads also increased, and mean mine elevation above sea level decreased. As well, in 1995, mines were predominantly located upslope of MEX140, whereas in 2006, most mines were located downslope of MEX140 in the valley bottom.

## Household Land-Use Decisions

According to household surveys, land-use practices changed between 1990 and 2006; more land was cultivated in 1990 and more was fallowed or abandoned in 2006 (Table 2). Moreover, in 1990, agriculture made up 50 percent or more of household incomes for thirty-five of sixty-two surveyed households (57 percent). Conversely, in 2006, agriculture comprised 50 percent or more of incomes for only nineteen of sixty-six surveyed households (29 percent). The general consensus in all three ejidos was that agriculture became less economically viable during the 1990s and, as a result, many households found alternative incomes.

Surveyed households first sold tepetzil in 1968, with sales increasing steadily from the late 1980s through

Figure 3. Land-use and land-cover change in ejido Sierra de Agua, ejido Los Molinos, and ejido Cruz Blanca and in the three study ejidos combined. Land area devoted to agriculture (yellow bars), settlements (gray bars), tepetzil mining (pink bars), tree cover (green bars), and other (brown bars) in 1995, 2003/2004, and 2006. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 4. Changes in mine characteristics from pre-1995 to 2006. Trendlines demonstrate a steady increase in mean overburden depth (m), mean tepetzil deposit thickness (m), mean mine depth (m), and mean distance from paved road (m), as well as a decrease in mine elevation (m above sea level).

<!-- image -->

2006 (Figure 5). Between 1968 and 2006, forty-two ejidatario households sold a total of fifty-five agricultural plots (95 ha) for tepetzil mining. The mean plot size sold was 1.7 ha. Sixty percent (62 ha) of these plots were located upslope of MEX140. The principle motivations to sell tepetzil were household emergencies (e.g., hospital bills, past debts); home construction or improvement; general household needs (e.g., consumer items, travel expenses, or money for children); and investments in capital improvements (e.g., a vehicle, a block-making machine, farm equipment; Table 3). Twenty-four of sixty-six households did not sell tepetzil. Of these, eleven households actively farmed the land and did not want to convert their fields into mines, six had little or no tepetzil on their land, and two were speculating that the price of tepetzil would rise. The remaining five households sold the land before tepetzil was extracted. One hectare of tepetzil sold for ∼ 15,000 pesos ( ∼ $ 4,505; 3.33 Ps = US $ 1) in 1994 and for ∼ 150,000 Ps ( ∼ US $ 13,216; 11.35Ps = US $ 1) in 2006.

Regarding the effects of tepetzil extraction on soil quality, respondents reported that the substrate below tepetzil was 'sterile' or that topsoil mixed with tepetzil during the mining process was unproductive for agriculture. Most respondents agreed that with high inputs of labor, compost, manure, and natural fertilizer, mine substrates could be productive in four to five years. A few respondents felt that rehabilitated soils in tepetzil pits were superior to soils in unmined, upslope fields.

## Postextraction Land Use

Based on my measurements, in 2006, tepetzil extraction affected 702 ha of land in the Perote Valley, of which 66 ha were actively mined and 636 ha had been extracted. Of all extracted mines in the valley, 58 percent were abandoned; 33 percent were recultivated; 4 percent were planted with pine trees; 4 percent were occupied by sports fields, schools, houses, roads, refuse, apiculture, or actively mined for the underlying volcanic sand; and 1 percent was occupied by bloqueras.

Mine characteristics were found to influence postextraction land use. Large mines tended to be active, abandoned, or used for agriculture, whereas smaller mines were often converted into pine plantations, bloqueras, or other land uses (Figure 6). Nonparametric Mann-Whitney U and Kruskal-Wallis tests were used to examine differences in mine characteristics among postextraction land-use systems. Mean mine area, mean mine depth, mean tepetzil depth, mean overburden depth, mean elevation, and mean distance from paved road all differed significantly (Kruskal-Wallis test, p &lt; 0.000 to p &lt; 0.006) among the six postextraction landuse types.

Table 2. Household land use in study ejidos, 1990 and 2006 (based on surveys)

|                       | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   | Percentage area   |
|-----------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|-------------------|
|                       | Sierra de Agua    | Sierra de Agua    | Los Molinos       | Los Molinos       | Cruz Blanca       | Cruz Blanca       | Study ejidos      | Study ejidos      |
|                       | 1990 ( n = 25)    | 2006 ( n = 29)    | 1990 ( n = 29)    | 2006 ( n = 30)    | 1990 ( n = 5)     | 2006 ( n = 7)     | 1990 ( n = 59)    | 2006 ( n = 66)    |
| Agriculture           | 96 . 0            | 83 . 1            | 90 . 1            | 72 . 5            | 100 . 0           | 100 . 0           | 92 . 7            | 78 . 0            |
| Pine trees            | 2 . 4             | 4 . 5             | 0 . 0             | 14 . 9            | 0 . 0             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 8             | 10 . 1            |
| Fallow/abandoned mine | 1 . 6             | 9 . 7             | 0 . 0             | 8 . 4             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 5             | 8 . 5             |
| Forested              | 0 . 0             | 1 . 3             | 9 . 5             | 4 . 3             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 0             | 5 . 8             | 2 . 9             |
| Actively mined        | 0 . 0             | 1 . 3             | 0 . 4             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 0             | 0 . 3             | 0 . 5             |

Based on chi-square tests, postextraction land use also differed significantly ( χ 2 = 357.841, p &lt; 0.000) with the year mined. In the Perote Valley, abandoned and agricultural land uses accounted for more than 92 percent of postextraction land use for all but three extraction years: pre-1995, 1996, and 1998-1999. In 2006, 64 percent of mines extracted prior to 1995 were abandoned, and only 18 percent were recultivated. Areas mined from 1995 to 1999, however, were more likely to be recultivated than abandoned, and areas mined after 2000 were more likely to be abandoned than recultivated.

In the study ejidos, the two most important postextraction land uses found in the 448 ha impacted by mining were abandoned and agricultural land. In 2006, 45 percent of mined land had been abandoned, and 41 percent had been recultivated (Table 4). Although these two land uses made up 81 percent or more of postextraction land uses in each ejido, percentages differed among ejidos. Sierra de Agua had the highest percentage of abandoned land (55 percent) and Cruz Blanca the highest percentage of recultivated land (55 percent). In Cruz Blanca, highway construction accounted for a large percentage of the postextraction land used for other purposes (Table 4).

Finally, among the surveyed households who sold tepetzil, most of the land (76 ha) had been extracted by 2006. On the extracted land, households reported that 57 percent was recultivated, 16 percent planted in pine trees, and 27 percent temporarily abandoned. Sixty-nine percent of recultivated mines were located upslope of MEX140.

## Discussion

## Aggregate Mining and Deagriculturalization

Aggregate mining and deagriculturalization in the Perote Valley are part of a positive-feedback cycle that highlights the mutual causality between urbanization processes and agricultural change (Figure 7). Through employment and migration, rural households integrate into urban growth and expansion, thereby creating demand for building materials (Fry 2008a). Building material extraction and production in turn create temporary employment and financial opportunities in rural areas but also transform rural landscapes. For example, this study found a striking fourfold increase in tepetzil mine area from 1995 to 2006, which was associated

Table 3. Responses to the question, 'What was your principle motive for selling tepetzil?'

| Motive for selling tepetzil      |   Number of responses | Percentage of responses   |
|----------------------------------|-----------------------|---------------------------|
| Household emergency              |                    18 | 35 . 3                    |
| Home construction or improvement |                    17 | 33 . 3                    |
| General household needs          |                    11 | 21 . 6                    |
| Capital investments              |                     9 | 17 . 6                    |
| No choice                        |                     2 | 3 . 9                     |
| Total responses                  |                    57 |                           |

Note : Forty-one respondents sold tepetzil. Twelve respondents sold more than one plot and their motives varied. Two respondents sold for more than one reason.

Figure 5. Bars represent the sum area and number of tepetzil plots sold by survey respondents per year since 1968. The line is the cumulative proportion of survey respondents who sold tepetzil.

<!-- image -->

with a concomitant decrease in agricultural land. For some farmers, selling tepetzil from below agricultural fields was more profitable than farming and therefore became a viable household livelihood alternative to the diminished returns they received for their agricultural products. In total, 58 percent of mined areas in the Perote Valley were abandoned in 2006. Because abandoned and degraded mines diminish future landuse capabilities, mine abandonment might push rural residents to further diversify incomes through employment in urban areas. To Rigg (2007), these types of cyclical relationships are part of a 'profound change in how people . . . think about their lives and their futures and the aspirations that inform the decisions they take' (64). Moreover, and as the following discussion demonstrates, this study shows that in the case of aggregate surface mining, geophysical characteristics as well as individual household livelihood strategies, consumerism, adoption rent, and speculation influence the process of deagriculturalization by determining which areas are prone to mining, how land is valued, and how lands are used following extraction.

Figure 6. Tepetzil mine characteristics ( y axis) and postextraction land uses ( x axis) in 2006. In individual graphs, letters above bars indicate significant relationships between postextraction land uses for each mine characteristic (error bars =± 2 SE ). Actv = actively mined; Abnd = abandoned; Agri = agriculture; Pine = pine plantation; Bloq = concrete block manufacturing; Othr = other land use.

<!-- image -->

Figure 7. A model of a positive feedback cycle showing the relationship between rural to urban migration, urbanization and construction, and deagriculturalization and aggregate mining.

<!-- image -->

## A Geophysical/Economic Perspective on Where Tepetzil Mining Occurs and Why

A first step in the transformation of tepetzil into an urban commodity is the development of a market (i.e., buyers and sellers). Therefore, to understand where and why mining occurred in the Perote Valley, this section briefly examines the buyer rationale, in this case the perspective of tepetzil extractors. Mining operations are influenced by geography, because extractors target areas where materials are most accessible before moving to less accessible areas (Freudenburg 1992). In the Perote Valley, some of the earliest tepetzil mines (i.e., prior to the 1970s) were located between Sierra de Agua and Cruz Blanca along route MEX140 in downcut arroyo channels, where exposed tepetzil was most accessible and inexpensive to extract. Early extractors used gravity to lessen their workload. Using picks and shovels, tepetzil was scraped into horse-drawn carts backed against downcut arroyo walls. In the latter decades of the twentieth century, agricultural fields became primary targets for extraction. Extractors targeted upslope agricultural plots prior to valley-bottom plots, because the shallow overburden made tepetzil more accessible and less costly to extract (Figure 4; see, e.g., Wallwork 1974; Freudenburg 1992). In addition, cleared fields contained few surface obstructions or tree roots, and most of these plots were located close to paved roads (Figure 4). Because aggregates are high-tonnage, low-value commodities, extractors strive to reduce overall production costs by decreasing extraction and transportation expenditures (Wallwork 1974). Physical accessibility to deposits and proximity to markets are thus crucial factors affecting the spatial location of aggregate mines.

More recently, with improved technologies, mining expanded into Perote's valley-bottom areas with deeper overburden. Not only are these deposits less accessible, but they are also farther from paved roads (Figure 4). As such, they are more costly to extract. Extraction techniques also determine the spatial extent of mines, as shown by Wallwork (1974). In Perote, manual extraction limited the spatial extent of tepetzil mining in the 1980s when access was dependent on proximity to MEX140. However, by the 1990s, mechanization (front-end loaders, in particular) contributed to the expansion of mines by allowing extractors to move into previously inaccessible areas including valley bottoms, the most productive agricultural lands.

## A Household Perspective on Where Tepetzil Mining Occurs and Why

Commodity Markets and Livelihood Diversification. Although the extractors' rationale might explain which tepetzil deposits were targeted first, ultimately, tepetzil extraction relies on landowners' willingness to sell tepetzil from below agricultural fields. Household and livelihood studies have found that new commodity markets often play an important role in agricultural change, particularly land-use decisions (e.g., Barlett 1980; Finan 1988; Keys and

Table 4. Study ejidos and tepetzil mine use in 2006 (based on geographic information system data)

|                   | Sierra de Agua   | Sierra de Agua   | Los Molinos   | Los Molinos   | Cruz Blanca   | Cruz Blanca   | Study ejidos   | Study ejidos   |
|-------------------|------------------|------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|----------------|----------------|
|                   | Hectares         | %area            | Hectares      | %area         | Hectares      | %area         | Hectares       | %area          |
| Active mines      | 2 . 0            | 1 . 3            | 20 . 9        | 10 . 1        | 3 . 1         | 3 . 7         | 26 . 1         | 5 . 8          |
| Abandoned         | 85 . 4           | 54 . 9           | 94 . 4        | 45 . 8        | 22 . 1        | 26 . 2        | 201 . 9        | 45 . 3         |
| Agriculture       | 45 . 7           | 29 . 4           | 89 . 6        | 43 . 5        | 46 . 3        | 54 . 8        | 181 . 5        | 40 . 7         |
| Pine trees        | 15 . 0           | 9 . 7            | 1 . 2         | 0 . 6         | 0 . 2         | 0 . 3         | 16 . 5         | 3 . 7          |
| Other             | 0 . 5            | 0 . 3            | 0 . 0         | 0 . 0         | 11 . 7        | 13 . 9        | 12 . 3         | 2 . 7          |
| Bloqueras         | 6 . 9            | 4 . 5            | 0 . 0         | 0 . 0         | 0 . 9         | 1 . 1         | 7 . 9          | 1 . 8          |
| Mined area (2006) | 155 . 5          | 100 . 0          | 206 . 1       | 100 . 0       | 84 . 5        | 100 . 0       | 446 . 2        | 100 . 0        |

McConnell 2005; Tugault-Lafleur and Turner 2009). In this study, demand for tepetzil provided farming households with an opportunity to increase profits from agricultural land. Areas targeted for extraction were those ejidatario farmers regarded as the most expendable. Farmers preferred to sell upslope, marginal agricultural fields, because they were the least productive and therefore dispensable. Surveyed respondents overwhelmingly agreed that crop productivity was lower on upslope compared to valley-bottom plots. Many attributed this to thinner soil depths on gradually eroded slopes as well as to the presence of tepetzil near the surface, which they said 'absorbed water away from crops.' Thus, farmers maximized profits by retaining prime agricultural land and selling marginal lands more suitable for tepetzil extraction.

Household motivations to sell tepetzil can also be interpreted as a livelihood strategy, however. Households diversify livelihoods to reduce vulnerability and poverty or to enhance wealth and security (Davies and Hossain 1997). In Perote, survey data indicate that tepetzil sales were related to vulnerability reduction, poverty alleviation, wealth enhancement, and household security (Table 3). According to Rigg (1998), households diversify incomes to accumulate, survive, or consolidate resources. For example, capital investments, such as block-making machines or farm equipment, and other strategic adaptations allow households to secure better jobs and higher incomes (Goldstein, Childs, and Wangdui 2008).

Although the decision to sell tepetzil can be categorized in terms of livelihood vulnerability or strategic adaptation, broader sociocultural changes in Mexican society could also have influenced household decisions. Neoliberal reforms to the ejido and agriculture sectors, which reorganized federal support away from smallholder farming and toward export-oriented, mechanized, large-scale agricultural production (Cornelius and Myhre 1998; Hamilton, DeWalt, and Barkin 2003; Perramond 2008), affected many Mexican smallholder farmers during the 1990s, including land-owning households in Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca. Among the surveyed households, this was reflected in the oft-repeated sentiment ' la agricultura no vale ' ('It does not pay to farm'). Indeed, 28 percent fewer households depended on agriculture as a primary income source in 2006 than in 1990. During this period, growing demand for tepetzil pulled many households into the tepetzil and block production industry; by 2006, the economies of all three ejidos were centered on tepetzil.

Home Construction. The motivation to sell tepetzil to build or improve a house (Table 3) deserves further attention, because house construction and home ownership are central to rural household decisions throughout Mexico. In the 1980s and 1990s, high interest rates and lack of access to credit prevented many Mexicans from acquiring funds to build or buy homes (Centro de Informaci´ on para el Desarrollo 1991). As a result, desire to buy or improve a home became one of the principal motivations for many lower income Mexicans to migrate to the United States (Monto 1994; Cohen 2001; Parrado 2002). The proliferation of large, two-story migrant houses throughout rural Mexico reflects the sociocultural drive to own a home. At the same time, the presence of new homes serves to reinforce the cultural desire of homeownership among others (Fletcher 1997). These types of homes first appeared in Cruz Blanca in the early 1990s and later appeared in Los Molinos and Sierra de Agua.

Undoubtedly, homes offer security, can be good investments, and serve as collateral for acquiring loans, but more modern-style homes in rural communities in the tropics, which are often built by the owner, also affirm social position and legitimize new forms of wealth (Colloredo-Mansfield 1994). Wilk (1989) argued that new houses embody the independence and separateness sought by a consumer culture. To Fletcher (1997), the proliferation of newer, consumer-style homes in rural Mexicosymbolizes the growing disjuncture between traditional pursuits, like subsistence and social well-being, and more modern pursuits such as individualism and independence. In tepetzil communities, new two-story homes are but one embodiment of the disjuncture betweentraditional agricultural pursuits and consumerists' indulgences in self-expression. Another manifestation of consumerism on the landscape is the mined agricultural land that facilitates construction of new homes in these communities.

Adoption Rent Versus Speculation. Although some farmers were willing to sell tepetzil from upslope plots, many were initially reluctant, as demonstrated by the slow increase in the cumulative number of tepetzil sellers over time (Figure 5). Initial uncertainties about the agricultural potential of tepetzil pits, including rehabilitation costs and requirements, were only allayed when it became apparent that mined pits could be reused and that rehabilitation costs were not prohibitively expensive, causing the rate of sales to increase more rapidly. In fact, change in sales over time is similar

to the S-shaped curve observed by proponents of innovation diffusion-adoption theory (e.g., Brown 1981; Rogers 2003). According to this concept, early adopters of new farming technology accrue relative advantages such as increased levels of production (Rogers 2003). Over time, increasing numbers of rational neighbors also decide to adopt the technology. Although tepetzil extraction was not a new technology per se, early innovators (i.e., tepetzil sellers) received lump-sum payments, or what Brown (1981) referred to as adoption rent , which served to motivate other ejido members to also sell.

Another feature of adoption studies is the characterization of adopters as 'early' versus 'late' adopters or 'innovators' versus 'laggards' (Stone 2007). As the latter terms suggest, innovators accrue more relative advantages than laggards. Brown (1981) noted that as more farmers adopt, supply increases. As a result, prices decrease to the point where adoption rent eventually reaches zero. For tepetzil sellers, these characterizations are problematic, because early sellers received less money for tepetzil than later sellers. Indeed, because the scarcity value of nonrenewable mineral resources increases over time (Hotelling 1931), late or even the very last tepetzil sellers can accrue the greatest relative advantages. A few surveyed households recognized that tepetzil likely would be worth more in the future because of its nonrenewable nature. In the study ejidos, these speculators fell into two camps: A few households anticipated larger profits from future tepetzil sales, whereas others retained fields with tepetzil as an asset to be used in future emergencies. Thus, early tepetzil sellers gained advantages through adoption rent, whereas later sellers took advantage of the rising scarcity value of tepetzil (Figure 8). Put another way, the earliest tepetzil sellers behaved like farmers, whereas later sellers behave like speculators.

In addition to household livelihoods and local economies shifting from farmto tepetzil-based, the value placed on land-use practices also changed from agriculture to tepetzil. In Guyana, a similar scenario occurred when speculation on subsurface resources also caused the revalorization of land uses (Bridge 2002). Among the tepetzil communities, the value of agricultural productivity diminished, as the scarcity value of the tepetzil deposit increased. This revalorization does not bode well for mine recultivation. As the following section demonstrates, the movement of mining from upslope areas, which have shallow tepetzil and shallow overburden, to the valley bot-

Figure 8. Shifts in prices over time: The adoption rent associated with innovation adoption and the scarcity value associated with nonrenewable resource speculation (adapted from Dasgupta and Heal 1980; Brown 1981).

<!-- image -->

toms, which have deep tepetzil and deep overburden, also increases the likelihood that mines will be abandoned.

## Postextraction Mine Use and Notions of Abandonment

Interviews with farming households indicate that the decision to mine tepetzil was predicated on using the tepetzil pits postextraction. Yet, this study found that many mines were not recultivated and that the reuse of minedpits was dependent on several variables: (1) physical characteristics of mines, (2) land and resource availability, (3) lax enforcement of rehabilitation guidelines, and (4) perceptions of abandonment.

First, postextraction land use differed between small and large area mines. Distance from roads was most important in determining how small mines were utilized. Smaller mines far from roads were planted in pine, and block-making facilities were found in mines closer to roads (Figure 6). Block-making facilities rely on visibility and ease of access to attract customers, and the mine's vertical drop lessens overall costs and increases block production rates. Abandonment of large mines was dependent on mine depth, overburden thickness, and location (Figure 6). Postextraction agriculture was more likely to occur in large mines or shallow mines with little overburden located upslope, whereas abandoned mines were deep, with large amounts of overburden, and located in valley bottoms. Wallwork (1974) noted that shallow aggregate pits in rural areas are often restored to agriculture immediately after excavation, whereas exceptionally deep aggregate pits are more

difficult to reclaim. This is due to the high cost associated with rehabilitation (Nicolau 2003). Notably, 41 percent of abandoned mines ceased mining only after 2000, leaving but a few years prior to the 2006 field study for rehabilitation.

Second, degrees of postextraction recultivation and abandonment varied among Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca ejidos due to differences in land and resource availability (Table 4). For example, Cruz Blanca recultivated the greatest mine area. It is possible that this ejido's relatively small area and land constraints provided households with greater incentive to reuse and rehabilitate tepetzil mines. Other reasons for greater reclamation rates in Cruz Blanca include greater agricultural yields and higher value placed on agricultural land by community members, shallower mine overburden, and lack of access to income from timber exploitation.

The availability of income from timber harvesting in large communal forests in Sierra de Agua and Los Molinos might partially explain why more mines were abandoned here in 2006. Moreover, a number of ejidatarios from Sierra de Agua felt that timber and wood products harvested from communal forests would eventually support livelihoods in the ejido, especially considering the future exhaustion of tepetzil. As a result, they viewed planting pine trees in mines as a positive opportunity, because profits were made in the short term from the sale of tepetzil and in the long term from lumber.

Third, lax enforcement of reclamation guidelines and fewer municipal revenues to pay for rehabilitating long-abandoned mines might have contributed to lower reclamation rates among deep surface mines in remote areas (Wallwork 1974). In the Perote Valley, permits to exploit tepetzil are authorized by the Secretar´ ıa de Medio Ambiente y Recursos Naturales. Extractors pay a fee for an environmental impact assessment (EIA) and are obligated to restore and rehabilitate mined areas after tepetzil removal. From 1998 to 2003, seventy mining operations in the Perote Valley received EIAs. In 2006, however, few people paid for EIAs because these were considered unnecessary and not all extractors rehabilitated mines. Similar issues with surface mine rehabilitation have been found elsewhere (e.g., Milgrom 2008). Moreover, because tepetzil mining predominantly occurred on agricultural fields rather than in forested areas, state permits for land-use change, which are more strictly enforced, were not necessary for tepetzil mining as of 2006. 2

Fourth, it is worth noting that there are inconsistencies between my field measurements of mine abandonment and household survey reports. Whereas I classified 45 percent of mines in the study ejidos as abandoned (Table 4), survey respondents claimed to temporarily abandon 27 percent of mines on their land. Part of this discrepancy might be due to the survey sample size or a lack of participation in the survey by a small group of key tepetzil-extracting ejidatarios. Several abandoned plots in Los Molinos and Sierra de Agua were reportedly owned by these individuals. Another possible reason for this discrepancy involves the notion of temporary abandonment. Land use is not static and farmers' long-term land-use intentions are not always readily observable (Doolittle 2001). Ninety-six percent of survey respondents who left tepetzil pits abandoned said they did so temporarily, which could mean weeks, months, years, or lifetimes. According to survey respondents, 58 percent of temporarily abandoned plots were located upslope, which increases the likelihood of eventual reuse. That these pits might yet be reused suggests an affinity with fallow fields, which are notoriously difficult to distinguish from abandoned fields (Harden 1996).

Normal fallow periods in the study region vary. Most of the fields in close proximity to communities are cultivated on annual cycles, whereas isolated upslope and valley fields are fallowed for longer periods. Because fallowing is standard practice in the region, temporary abandonment of tepetzil mines could be interpreted as fitting into the normal fallow cycle. In my view, this interpretation is problematic for two reasons. First, as discussed earlier, there are marked differences between upslope and valley-bottom tepetzil pits. Low rates of postextraction leveling and management recorded in valley-bottom mines-due to high costs and lax enforcement of rehabilitation guidelines-suggests that these are prohibitively difficult to rehabilitate, regardless of land owner intentions. Second, due to the complete removal of biomass, mine surfaces have little organic material, little organic matter input, and diminished water-holding capacity (see, e.g., Harden 1996; Khanal and Watanabe 2006). In Perote's arid climate, mines that are not actively rehabilitated cannot develop the biomass and soil matrix necessary for plant colonization. This scenario combined with the decreasing importance of farming as a livelihood will most likely lead to long-term abandonment and degradation of many tepetzil mines.

## Conclusion: Construction Materials, the Urbanization Process, and Agricultural Change in the Tropics

This study demonstrates that urban-driven demand for construction materials plays a significant role in shaping rural land-use decisions and livelihoods in the Perote Valley, Mexico. Between 1995 and 2006, the number of agricultural fields mined for subsurface aggregates increased dramatically. Although farmers were initially reluctant to sell tepetzil extraction rights, several factors induced them to do so, including diminishing returns to agriculture, consumerist desires for new or improved homes, and rising tepetzil prices. Over time, farmers also became more willing to sell tepetzil due to a shift in how they valued their land. When the scarcity value of tepetzil became greater than the land's agricultural value, farmers preferred to exploit the land for concrete aggregates rather than for crops, leading to the expansion of mining into prime agricultural land. Despite landowners' stated intentions to recultivate mines, nearly 50 percent were not recultivated in 2006, resulting in a net loss of agricultural land. These findings have immediate implications for farming in this region and, more broadly, for the ways in which geographers approach the study of agricultural landscapes and human-environment interactions at the rural-urban interface. As well, this case study highlights some of the social and environmental outcomes associated with an expanding global construction industry.

Construction aggregate mining is a major land-use activity in and around expanding urban areas. Surprisingly, this topic has received relatively little attention from geographers (Fry 2008a). Nonetheless, the United Nations Population Fund (2007) predicted that cities in the tropics will house 80 percent of the world's urban population by 2030, a demographic shift that will certainly affect rural areas in at least two significant ways. First, urban construction projects provide employment opportunities for rural residents seeking alternative incomes to agriculture. Second, rural and urban peripheries are primary sources of construction materials for cities. In volcanic lacustrine basins and river floodplains, where agricultural lands sometimes overlie construction material deposits, farmers must decide whether or not to sell aggregates or continue farming.

In this study, one third of surveyed households sold tepetzil from below agriculture fields to build or improve homes, suggesting that the desire for a new home is an important driver of agricultural land-use change in the study region. Recent research shows that home construction in Mexican cities is strongly influenced by government policy. Harner, Huerta, and Sol´ ıs (2009) found that the home construction boom in Guadalajara, Mexico, partly resulted from a neoliberal shift in federal housing policy. They argued that deregulation of the housing market allowed the Mexican government to provide individuals with credit for the purchase of new, used, and second properties, as well as loans for home construction and renovation. Increased access to loans and credit, in turn, fueled a speculative housing market and unfettered urban expansion. In addition to changes in housing policy, neoliberal reforms to Mexico's ejido sector have also affected construction and urban expansion. For example, one notable outcome of the legalization of ejido land sales was the conversion of ejidos surrounding metropolitan areas into urban land (Harner, Huerta, and Sol´ ıs 2009). These findings indicate that the desire for new or improved homes and the process of home building need to be considered as potentially key elements driving land and livelihood transformations in both agricultural and rural-urban areas.

Another finding from this research that is relevant to human-environment geographers is the important role of land revalorization in agricultural decision making. As this case study demonstrates, declining profits from farming coupled with increasing prices for tepetzil not only encouraged speculation among farmers but also caused some households to place greater value on the mining than on the agricultural potential of land. Thus, the presence of nonrenewable, subsurface resources can affect perceptions of land value as well as current and future land uses (Bridge 2002). In addition, proximity to growing urban areas might also influence how farmers value land (Zollinger and Krannich 2002). In the tropics, urbanization generally outbids all other uses for land adjacent to cities, including prime cropland (Lambin et al. 2001). Therefore, recognizing how land is valued is important to predict agricultural change and land use in areas with viable subsurface deposits as well as in urban peripheries.

Finally, because the likelihood of recultivation decreases as tepetzil mines get deeper, surface mining has serious implications for farming in agricultural regions. Deep tepetzil mines are costly and difficult to rehabilitate. In addition to high rehabilitation costs, the diminishing viability of farming as a livelihood strategy lessens land owners' incentives to recultivate mines. In the short term, widespread mine abandonment reduces regional agricultural potential, and low agricultural prices diminish the probability of mine recultivation.

In the long term, these factors combined could serve to motivate people to migrate to cities for work. In this way, deagriculturalization is linked to urban demand for building materials and aggregate mining through a positive feedback loop that is integral to the contemporary process of urbanization in the tropics.

## Acknowledgments

I am grateful to the residents of Sierra de Agua, Los Molinos, and Cruz Blanca for their hospitality and assistance; to Alexandra Ponette-Gonz´ alez for her time and insightful comments; and to Gil Ortiz, Raul Cortez, Andres de la Rosa, and Sergio Rodr´ ıguez for assistance. I thank Bill Doolittle for advising me on portions of this research. I also thank four anonymous reviewers and Karl Zimmerer for their constructive comments. This study was carried out with support from the National Science Foundation Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant #0703460 and the Robert E. Veselka Endowed Fellowship Research Grant from the University of Texas at Austin, Department of Geography and the Environment. A shorter version of this article was presented at the 2010 annual meetings of the Association of American Geographers, Washington, DC.

## Notes

1. Although Programa de Apoyo Directo al Campo/Program for Direct Assistance in Agriculture (PROCAMPO) was established to support farmers in the interim. PROCAMPO involved monetary payments based on cultivated area (ha) of major subsistence crops; it expired in 2010 (see Klepeis and Vance 2003).
2. In addition to the state's mining permits, each study ejido has particular guidelines and fees for exploiting tepetzil, including a 5 to 10 percent fee on the sale price of the tepetzil, a fee for each front-end loader in operation at the mine, fees for impacts on neighboring plots (e.g., from road and mine dust), and a monthly fee paid while the tepetzil is extracted. Although these guidelines are in place, they are hard to enforce.

## References

- Abizaid, C., and O. T. Coomes. 2004. Land use and forest fallowing dynamics in seasonally dry tropical forests of the southern Yucat´ an Peninsula, Mexico. LandUsePolicy 21:71-84.
- Aguilar, A. G., B. Graizbord, and A. S´ anchez. 1996. Las Ciudades Intermedias y el Desarrollo Regional en Mexico [Intermediate cities and regional development in Mexico]. Mexico City, Mexico: Consejo Nacional para la Cultura y las Artes, El Colegio de Mexico, Instituto de Geographia, UNAM.
- Araghi, F. A. 1995. Global depeasantization, 1945-1990. The Sociological Quarterly 36 (2): 337-68.
- Arbogast, B. F., D. H. Knepper, and W. H. Langer. 2000. The human factor in mining reclamation. U.S. Geological Survey Circulation 1191:28.
- Ball, M., and P. Connolly. 1987. Capital accumulation in the Mexican construction industry, 1930-82. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 11 (2): 15371.
- Barlett, P. F. 1980. Agricultural decision making: Anthropological contributions to rural development . New York: Academic.
- Blaikie, P., and H. Brookfield. 1987. Land degradation and society. London: Methuen.
- Bolen, W. P. 2008. Sand and gravel construction. In USGS 2006 minerals yearbook: Sand and gravel, construction, U.S. Department of Interior and U.S. Geological Survey, 64.1-64.19 . Reston, VA: U.S. Geological Survey for Mineral Industry Surveys Annual Reviews. http://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/commodity/sand &amp; gravel construction/myb1-2006-sandc.pdf (last accessed 12 December 2008).
- Bridge, G. 2002. Grounding globalization: The prospects and perils of linking economic processes of globalization to environmental outcomes. Economic Geography 78 (3): 361-86.
- Browder, J. O., and M. A. Pedlowski. 2000. Agroforestry performance on small farms in Amazonia: Findings from the Rondonia agroforestry pilot project. Agroforestry Systems 49 (1): 63-83.
- Brown, L. A. 1981. Innovation diffusion: A new perspective. London: Methuen.
- Bryceson, D. F. 1996. Deagrarianization and rural employment in sub-Saharan Africa: A sectoral perspective. World Development 24 (1): 97-111.
- ---. 2002. The scramble in Africa: Reorienting rural livelihoods. World Development 30 (5): 725-39.
- Capitanachi Moreno, M. C., E. M. Ultrera Barillas, and C. B. Smith. 2004. El Bosque Urbano de Xalapa, Veracruz [The urban forest of Xalapa, Veracruz]. Xalapa, Veracruz, Mexico: Instituto de Ecolog´ ıa A.C./Universidad Veracruzana/Sigolgo CONACYT Transferencia Tecnol´ ogica, Discs 1 and 2.
- Cederroth, S., and I. Gerdin. 1986. Cultivating poverty: The case of the green revolution in Lombok. In Rice societies: Asian problems and prospects , ed. I. Norlund, S. Cederroth, and I. Gerdin, 124-50. London: Scandanavian Institute of Asian Studies and Curzon Press.
- Centro de Informaci´ on para el Desarrollo. 1991. Vivienda y estabilidad pol´ ıtica: Reconcebir las pol´ ıticas sociales [Livelihood and political stability: Re-conceiving social politics]. Mexico, City, Mexico: Centro de Investigaci´ on y Desarrollo.
- Chambers, K. J., S. B. Brush, M. N. Grote, and P. Gepts. 2007. Describing maize ( Zea mays L.) landrace persistence in the baj´ ıo of Mexico: A survey of 1940s and 1950s collection locations. Economic Botany 61 (1): 6072.
- Cohen, J. H. 2001. Transnational migration in rural Oaxaca, Mexico: Dependency, development, and the household. American Anthropologist 103 (4): 95467.
- Colloredo-Mansfield, R. 1994. Architectural conspicuous consumption and economic change in the Andes. American Anthropologist 96 (4): 845-65.

- Colten, C. E. 1994. Chicago's waste lands: Refuse disposal and urban growth, 1840-1990. Journal of Historical Geography 20 (2): 124-42.
- Comisi´ on Nacional del Agua. n.d. Servicio Meteorol´ ogico Nacional: Precipitaci´ on para Las Vigas, Las Pescados, Perote [National Meteorological Service: Precipitation for Las Vigas, Los Pescados, Perote]. http://smn.cna. gob.mx/ (last accessed 21 November 2001).
- Connolly, P. 1982. Uncontrolled settlements and self-build: What kind of solution? The Mexico City case. In Selfhelp housing: A critique , ed. P. M. Ward, 118-41. London: Mansell.
- Cook, S. 1998. Mexican brick culture in the building of Texas, 1800s-1980s . College Station: Texas A&amp;M Press.
- Cornelius, W. A. 1998. Ejido reform: Stimulus or alternative to migration? In The transformation of rural Mexico: Reforming the ejido sector , ed. W. A. Cornelius and D. Myhre, 229-46. La Jolla: Center for US-Mexican Studies, University of California, San Diego.
- Cornelius, W. A., and D. Myhre. 1998. Introduction. In The transformation of rural Mexico: Reforming the ejido sector , ed. W. A. Cornelius and D. Myhre, 1-20. La Jolla: Center for US-Mexican Studies, University of California, San Diego.
- Dasgupta, P. S., and G. M. Heal. 1980. Economic theory and exhaustible resources. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Davies, S., and S. Hossain. 1997. Livelihood adaptation, public action and civil society: A review of the literature. IDS Working Paper, No. 57, Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, UK.
- Davis, M. 2006. Planet of slums. London: Verso.
- deJanvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2001. Income strategies among rural households in Mexico: The role of off-farm activities. World Development 29 (3): 467-80.
- Dimitri, C., A. Effland, and A. Conklin. 2005. The 20th century transformation of U.S. agriculture and farm policy . Economic Information Bulletin Number 3, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, Washington, DC.
- Doolittle, W. E. 2001. Learning to see the impacts of individuals. Geographical Review 91 (1-2): 423-29.
- Douglas, I., and N. Lawson. 2002. Material flows due to mining and urbanization. In A handbook of industrial ecology , ed. R. U. Ayres and L. W. Ayres, 351-61. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
- Eakin, H. 2005. Institutional change, climate risk, and rural vulnerability: Cases from central Mexico. World Development 33 (11): 1923-38.
- Engels, F. 1958. The condition of the working class in England. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- ESRI. 2008. ArcMap 9.3. Redlands, CA: Environmental Systems Research Institute.
- Ferriz, H., and G. A. Mahood. 1984. Eruption rates and compositional trends at Los Humeros Volcanic Center, Puebla, Mexico. Journal of Geophysical Research 89:8511-24.
- Finan, T. J. 1988. Market relationships and market performance in Northeast Brazil. American Ethnologist 15 (4): 694-709.
- Firman, T. 1991. Rural households, labor flows and the housing construction industry in Bandung, Indonesia. Ti-
- jdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geographie 82 (2): 94-105.
- Fitzgerald, D. 2003. Every farm a factory: The industrial ideal in American agriculture. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Fletcher, P. L. 1997. Building from migration: Imported design and everyday use of migrant houses in Mexico. In The allure of the foreign: Imported goods in postcolonial Latin America , ed. B. S. Orlove, 185-201. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
- Fox, J., and J. B. Vogler. 2005. Land-use and land-cover change in montane mainland Southeast Asia. Environmental Management 36 (3): 394-403.
- Freudenburg, W. R. 1992. Addictive economies: Extractive industries and vulnerable localities in a changing world economy. Rural Sociology 57 (3): 305-32.
- Fry, M. 2008a. Concrete-block farmers in Mexico. Geographical Review 98 (1): 123-32.
- Fry, M. 2008b. Mexico's concrete block landscape: A modern legacy in the vernacular. Journal of Latin American Geographers 72 (2): 36-58.
- Garza, G. 1999. Global economy, metropolitan dynamics and urban policies in Mexico. Cities 16 (3): 149-70.
- Giles, D. 2003. Smarter methods for locating aggregate deposits. Materials World 11 (2): 9-10.
- Goldstein, M. C., G. Childs, and P. Wangdui. 2008. 'Going for income' in village Tibet: A longitudinal analysis of change and adaptation, 1997-2007. Asian Survey 48 (3): 514-34.
- Gonz´ alez-Mart´ ınez, A. C., and H. Schandl. 2008. The biophysical perspective of a middle income economy: Material flows in Mexico. Ecological Economics 68:317-27.
- Grau, H. R., T. M. Aide, J. Zimmerman, J. R. Thomlinson, E. Helmer, and X. Zou. 2003. The ecological consequences of socioeconomic and land-use changes in post-agriculture Puerto Rico. Bioscience 53 (12): 1159-68.
- Griffin, K. 1974. Political economy of agrarian change: An essay on the green revolution. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Grimm, N. B., S. H. Faeth, N. E. Golubiewski, C. L. Redman, J. Wu, X. Bai, and J. M. Briggs. 2008. Global change and the ecology of cities. Science 319:756-60.
- Hamilton, S., B. R. DeWalt, and D. Barkin. 2003. Household welfare in four rural Mexican communities: The economic and social dynamics of surviving national crises. Mexican Studies/Estudios Mexicanos 19 (2): 433-62.
- Harden, C. P. 1996. Interrelationships between land abandonment and land degradation: A case from the Ecuadorian Andes. Mountain Research and Development 16 (3): 274-80.
- Harner, J., E. J. Huerta, and H. C. Sol´ ıs. 2009. Buying development: Housing and urban growth in Guadalajara, Mexico. Urban Geography 30 (5): 465-89.
- Hewett de Alc´ antara, C. 1976. Modernizing Mexican agriculture: Socioeconomic implications of technological change 1940-1970 . Geneva, Switzerland: UN Research Institute for Social Development.
- Horvath, A. 2004. Construction materials and the environment. Annual Review of Environmental Resources 29:181-204.
- Hotelling, H. 1931. The economics of exhaustible resources. Journal of Political Economy 39:137-75.

- Instituto Nacional de Estadist´ ıca y Geograf´ ıa (INEGI). n.d. Poblac´ ıon rural y urbana [Rural and urban population]. http://www.inegi.org.mx (last accessed 5 December 2009).
- ---. 1995. Perote E14B26: Puebla y Veracruz [Perote E14B26: Puebla and Veracruz]. 1:50,000. Aguascalientes, Mexico: Instituto Nacional de Estadist´ ıca Geograf´ ıa.
- Jackson, K. T. 1985. Crabgrass frontier: The suburbanization of the United States. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Kalnay, E., and M. Cai. 2003. Impact of urbanization and land-use change on climate. Nature 423 (6939): 528-31.
- Keleman, A., J. Hellin, and M. R. Bellon. 2009. Maize diversity, rural development policy, and farmers' practices: Lessons from Chiapas, Mexico. The Geographical Journal 175 (1): 52-70.
- Keys, E., and W. J. McConnell. 2005. Global change and the intensification of agriculture in the tropics. Global Environmental Change 15:320-37.
- Khanal, N. R., and T. Watanabe. 2006. Abandonment of agricultural land and its consequences: A case study in the Sikles Area, Gandaki Basin, Nepal Himalaya. Mountain Research and Development 26 (1): 32-40.
- King, A. 2007. Trade and totomoxtle: Livelihood strategies in the Totonacan region of Veracruz, Mexico. Agriculture and Human Values 24:29-40.
- Klepeis, P., and C. Vance. 2003. Neoliberal policy and deforestation in southeastern Mexico: An assessment of the PROCAMPO program. Economic Geography 79 (3): 221-40.
- Kloppenburg, J. R. 2004. First the seed: The political economy of plant biotechnology. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
- Knox, P. L., and L. McCarthy. 2005. Urbanization . (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
- Lambin, E. F., H. J. Geist, and E. Lepers. 2003. Dynamics of land-use and land-cover change in tropical regions. Annual Review of Environmental Resources 28:205-41.
- Lambin, E. F., B. L. Turner, H. J. Geist, S. B. Agbola, A. Angelsen, J. W. Bruce, O. T. Coomes, et al. 2001. The causes of land-use and land-cover change: Moving beyond the myths. Global Environmental Change 11:261-69.
- Li, G., J. Chen, and Z. Sun. 2007. Non-agricultural land expansion and its driving forces: A multi-temporal study of Suzhou, China. International Journal of Sustainable Development &amp; World Ecology 14:408-20.
- Lin, C., X. Tong, W. Lu, L. Yan, Y. Wu, C. Nie, C. Chu, and J. Long. 2005. Environmental impact of surface mining on mined lands, affected streams and agricultural lands in the Dabaoshan mine region, Southern China. Land Degradation &amp; Development 16:463-74.
- Liu, J., H. Tian, M. Liu, D. Zhuang, J. M. Melillo, and Z. Zhang. 2005. China's changing landscape during the 1990s: Large-scale land transformations estimated with satellite data. Geophysical Research Letters 32:1-5.
- Lobao, L., and K. Meyer. 2001. The great agricultural transition: Crisis, change, and social consequences of twentieth century US farming. Annual Review of Sociology 27:103-24.
- L´ opez, E., G. Bocco, M. Mendoza, and E. Duhau. 2001. Predicting land-cover and land-use change in the urban fringe: A case in Morelia city, Mexico. Landscape and Urban Planning 55:271-85.
- Mart´ ınez, B. A. 2003. Evaluaci´ on Dasom´ etrica de una Plantaci´ on de Pinus spp. en Perote, Veracruz, M´ exico [Dasometric evaluation of Pinus spp. in Perote, Veracruz, Mexico]. Foresta Veracruzana 5 (1): 27-32.
- McGee, T. G. 1991. Presidential address: Eurocentrism in geography-The case of Asian urbanization. The Canadian Geographer/Le G´ eographe canadien 35 (4): 33244.
- McKay, D. 2005. Reading remittance landscapes: Female migration and agricultural transition in the Philippines. Geografisk Tidsskrift, Danish Journal of Geography 105 (1): 89-99.
- Milgrom, T. 2008. Environmental aspects of rehabilitating abandoned quarries: Israel as a case study. Landscape and Urban Planning 87:172-79.
- Monto, A. 1994. The roots of Mexican labor migration. Westport, CT: Praeger.
- Mouflis, G. D., I. Z. Gitas, S. Iliadou, and G. H. Mitri. 2008. Assessment of the visual impact of marble quarry expansion (1984-2000) on the landscape of Thasos island, NE Greece. Landscape and Urban Planning 86:92-102.
- Nicolau, J. M. 2003. Trends in relief design and construction in opencast mining reclamation. Land Degradation &amp;Development 14:215-26.
- OEIDRUS Veracruz. 2006. Secretar´ ıa de Desarollo Agropecuario, Rural, Forestal y Pesca. Municipio Perote, Ciclicos y Perennes [Perote municipality, annuals and perrennials]. http://www.oeidrus-veracruz.gob.mx/ (last accessed 13 November 2008).
- Padoch, C., E. Brondizio, S. Costa, M. Pinedo-Vasquez, R. R. Sears, and A. Siqueira. 2008. Urban and rural cities: Multi-sited households, consumption patterns, and forest resources in Amazonia. Ecology and Society 13 (2): 2.
- Par´ es-Ramos, I. K., W. A. Gould, and T. M. Aide. 2008. Agricultural abandonment, suburban growth, and forest expansion in Puerto Rico between 1991 and 2000. Ecology and Society 13 (2): 1.
- Parrado, E. A. 2002. U.S. migration, home ownership, and housing quality. In Crossing the border: Research from the Mexican migration project , ed. J. Durand and D. S. Massey, 63-85. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
- Perramond, E. 2008. The rise, fall, and reconfiguration of the Mexican ejido. Geographical Review 98 (3): 356-71.
- Price, O., D. Milne, and C. Tynan. 2005. Poor recovery of woody vegetation on sand and gravel mines in the Darwin region of the Northern Territory. Ecological Management and Restoration 6 (2): 118-22.
- Ramsaran, R., and R. Hosein. 2006. Growth, employment and the construction industry in Trinidad and Tobago. Construction Management and Economics 24:465-74.
- Reardon, T., J. Berdegu´ e, and G. Escobar. 2001. Rural nonfarm employment and incomes in Latin America: Overview and policy implications. World Development 29:395-409.
- Rigg, J. 1998. Rural-urban interactions, agriculture and wealth: A southwest Asian perspective. Progress in Human Geography 22 (4): 497-522.
- ---.2007. Aneveryday geography of the Global South. London and New York: Routledge.
- ---. 2009. Grand narrative or modest comparison? Reflecting on the 'lessons' of East Asian development and growth. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 30:29-34.

- Rindtuss, R. R., S. J. Walsh, B. L. Turner, J. Fox, and V. Mishra. 2004. Developing a science of land change: Challenges and methodological issues. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 (39): 13976-81.
- Rogers, E. M. 2003. Diffusion of innovations. 5th ed. New York: Free Press.
- Rudel, T. K., D. Bates, and R. Machinguiashi. 2002. A tropical forest transition? Agricultural change, out-migration, and secondary forests in the Ecuadorian Amazon. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 92 (1): 87-102.
- Schteingart, M., and M. Sol´ ıs. 1994. Vivienda y Familia en Mexico: un Enfoque Socio-Espacial [Household and family in Mexico: A socio-spatial approach]. Aguascalientes, Mexico: Instituto Nacional de Estad´ ıstica, Geograf´ ıa e Inform´ atica.
- Seto, K. C., and M. Fragkias. 2005. Quantifying spatiotemporal patterns of urban land-use change in four cities of China with time series landscape metrics. Landscape Ecology 20:871-88.
- Shiva, V. 1991. Violence of green revolution: Third world agriculture, ecology, and politics. London: Zed Books.
- Simmons, J. A., W. S. Currie, K. N. Eshleman, K. Kuers, S. Monteleone, T. L. Negley, B. P. Pohlad, and C. S. Thomas. 2008. Forest to reclaimed mine land use change leads to altered ecosystem structure and function. Ecological Applications 18 (1): 104-18.
- Singh, A. L., and M. S. Asgher. 2005. Impact of brick kilns on land use/landcover changes around Aligarth city, India. Habitat International 29:591-602.
- Singh, J., and S. S. Dhillon. 2004. Agricultural geography. 3rd ed. Delhi, India: Tata McGraw-Hill.
- Soja, E. W. 2010. Cities and states in geohistory. Theory and Society 39:361-76.
- Sparks, R. S., and J. V. Wright. 1979. Welded air-fall tuffs. Geological Society of America 180:155-76.
- Stone, G. D. 2007. Agricultural deskilling and the spread of genetically modified cotton in Warangal. Current Anthropology 48 (1): 67-103.
- Townsend, P. A., D. P. Helmers, C. C. Kingdon, B. E. McNeil, K. M. de Beurs, and K. N. Eshleman. 2009. Changes in the extent of surface mining and reclamation in the Central Appalachians detected using a 1976-2006 Landsat time series. Remote Sensing of Environment 113:62-72.
- Tugault-Lafleur, C., and S. Turner. 2009. The price of spice: Ethnic minority livelihoods and cardamom commodity chains in upland northern Vietnam. Singapore Journal of Tropical Geography 30:388-403.
- Turner, B. L., E. F. Lambin, and A. Reenberg. 2007. The emergence of land change science for global environ-
- mental change and sustainability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 (52): 20666-71.
- United Nations Human Settlements Programme. 2003. The challenge of slums: Global report on human settlements . New York: United Nations.
- United Nations Population Fund. 2007. State of world population 2007: Unleashing the potential of urban growth . New York: United Nations.
- Wallwork, K. L. 1974. Derelict land: Origins and prospects of a land-use problem . Newton Abbot, UK: David &amp; Charles.
- West, R. C. 1964. Surface configuration and associated geology of Middle America. Handbook of Middle American Indians 1:33-83.
- ---.1974.Flat-roofed folk dwelling in rural Mexico. Geoscience and Man 5 (10 June): 11-132.
- Whitmore, T. M., and B. L. Turner. 2001. Cultivated landscapes of Middle America on the eve of conquest. Oxford, UK: University Press.
- Wiegers, E. S., R. J. Hijmans, D. Herv´ e, and L. O. Fresco. 1999. Land use intensification and disintensification in the Upper Ca˜ nete Valley, Peru. Human Ecology 27 (2): 319-35.
- Wiggins, S., N. Keilbach, K. Preibisch, S. Proctor, G. Rivera Herrej´ on, and G. Rodr´ ıguez Mu˜ noz. 2002. Agricultural policy reform and rural livelihoods in central Mexico. The Journal of Development Studies 38 (4): 179-202.
- Wilcox Young, L. 1993. Labour demand and agroindustrial development: The evidence from Mexico. The Journal of Development Studies 30 (1): 168-89.
- Wilk, R. R. 1989. Houses as consumer goods: Social processes and allocation decisions. In The social economy of consumption , ed. B. S. Orlove and H. J. Rutz, 297-322. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
- Williams, B. 1972. Tepetate in the valley of Mexico. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 62 (4): 618-26.
- Wilson, G. A., and J. Rigg. 2003. 'Post-productivist' agricultural regimes and the South: Discordant concepts? Progress in Human Geography 27 (6): 681-707.
- World Bank. 2001. World development report 2000/2001: Attacking poverty. New York: Oxford University Press.
- Wright, S. J., and H. C. Muller-Landau. 2006. The future of tropical forest species. Biotropica 38:287-301.
- Zollinger, B., and R. S. Krannich. 2002. Factors influencing farmers' expectations to sell agricultural land for non-agricultural uses. Rural Sociology 67 (3): 44263.
- Zoomers, A. E., and J. Kleinpenning. 1996. Livelihood and urban-rural relations in central Paraguay. Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geografie 87 (2): 161-74.