<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rtpg20

## Household Water Insecurity in the Global North: A Study of Rural and Periurban Settlements on the Texas-Mexico Border

## Wendy Jepson &amp; Emily Vandewalle

To cite this article: Wendy Jepson &amp; Emily Vandewalle (2016) Household Water Insecurity in the Global North: A Study of Rural and Periurban Settlements on the Texas-Mexico Border, The Professional Geographer, 68:1, 66-81, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2015.1028324

To link to this article:

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2015.1028324

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 21 May 2015.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 110

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 1 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## Household Water Insecurity in the Global North: A Study of Rural and Periurban Settlements on the Texas-Mexico Border

## Wendy Jepson and Emily Vandewalle

Texas A&amp;M University

This article examines household-level characteristics that predict water insecurity in low-income rural and periurban communities on the Texas -Mexico border. We employ two logistic regression models (binary and ordered) to identify household characteristics that are more likely to result in water insecurity. Our analyses yielded unexpected fi ndings: Whereas socioeconomic factors are weak predictors, immigration status of household members is a signi fi cant variable that contributes to household water insecurity. Policymakers need to pay more attention to marginalized communities as ' universal ' water access still leaves populations without adequate, reliable, and affordable water in the Global North. Key Words: colonias, household water security, logistic regression, Texas, water resources.

本 文 检 视 预 测 德 州 -墨 西 哥 边 界 上 ， 低 收 入 的 农 村 与 半 城 市 化 社 区 用 水 不 安 全 的 家 户 层 级 特 徵 。 我 们 运 用 两个 罗 吉 特 迴 归 模 型 （ 二 元 与 序 位 ） ， 指 认 更 有 可 能 导 致 用 水 不 安 全 的 家 户 特 徵 。 我 们 的 分 析 ， 得 到 了不 被 预 期 的 发 现 ： 社 会 经 济 因 素 是 较 弱 的 指 标 ， 反 之 ， 家 户成 员 的 移 民 身 份 ， 则 是 导 致 家 户 用 水 不 安 全 的 显 着 变 项 。 政 策 制 定 者 必 须 更 加 关 注 边 缘 化 的 社 群 ， 因 为 所 谓 ' 普 世 性 ' 的 水 资 源 取 得 管 道 ， 仍 然 让诸 多 全 球 北 方 的 人 口 未 能 获 得 适 宜 、 可 靠 且 可 负 担 的 用 水 。 关 键 词 : 殖 民 地 ，

家 户 用 水 安 全 ， 罗 吉 特 迴 归 ， 德 州 ， 水 资 源 。

Este artículo examina, en el  area limítrofe Texas-M  exico, las características que a nivel de hogares predicen problemas de inseguridad hídrica en comunidades rurales y periurbanas de bajos ingresos. Empleamos dos modelos de regresi  on logística (binario y ordenado) para identi fi car las características de los hogares m  as propensos a ser afectados por la inseguridad hídrica. Nuestros an  alisis generaron resultados inesperados: En tanto que los factores socioecon  omicos son predictores d  ebiles, el estatus de inmigraci  on de los miembros del hogar es una variable signi fi cativa que contribuye a la inseguridad hídrica del hogar. Los encargados de formular políticas deben poner mayor atenci  on a las comunidades marginadas, por cuanto el acceso ' universal ' al agua todavía deja poblaciones en el Norte Global sin agua adecuada, con fi able y econ  omicamente accesible. Palabras clave: colonias, seguridad hídrica para el hogar, regresi  on logística, Texas, recursos hídricos.

T he pervasive view that households in developed countries have universal, indoor plumbing and secure water belies everyday experiences in lowincome and marginalized communities, where access to and bene fi t from adequate, affordable, and safe drinking water are daily struggles. In the United States, more than 600,000 households, or approximately 1.5 million people, live without complete plumbing facilities (American Communities Survey 2012). Many are homeless or belong to migrant or economically distressed populations. In Europe, Roma settlements lack access to safe water and sanitation (Harper, Steger, and Fil  c  ak 2009; Laurent 2011). For economically distressed households with access to water infrastructure, water service might not be affordable and water reliability and quality might be inadequate (Cory and Rahman 2009). In Detroit, thousands face water shutoffs due to an inability to pay their monthly bills (Lukacs 2014), and in the United Kingdom, almost 24 percent of households are ' water poor, ' paying more than 3 percent of household monthly income for water and sanitation services (Bradshaw and Huby 2013). Water quality threatens human health and well-being for rural communities and the urban poor. Small rural water suppliers chronically violate federal statutes protecting safe drinking water (Balazs et al. 2011; Satija 2014), and Native American communities face increased risk of drinking water contamination in water systems (Mascarenhas 2007). Yet, as some have pointed out, the poor in developed countries ' do not count among the world ' s 1.1 billion who lack access to safe drinking water or 2.4 billion who lack access to improved sanitation ' (Wescoat et al. 2008, 802).

Technical challenges are regularly cited as the cause of domestic water service delivery problems in the Global North. Poor water-system design, lack of trained operators, and insuf fi cient economies of scale for rural community water systems are cited as the causes leading to chronic boil water advisories (Patrick 2011a, 2011b). Geographic isolation, paired with poverty, is also posited as a reason for poor drinking water access (Wescoat, Headington, and Theobald 2008). In other places, dishonest land developers, minimum enforcement of plumbing codes, inadequate lowincome housing stock, and water pricing schemes are

cited as contributing factors to poor water service in low-income areas in the United States (Ward 1999; Olmstead 2003).

Although previous studies on drinking water access are meritorious, current explanations narrow the discussion to technical gaps or pricing problems that interrupt physical fl ows of water to consumers despite the growing scholarship in human -environment geography that examines water provision as more than infrastructure. Drinking water is part of a larger hydrosocial waterscape, de fi ned as a system bound together by dynamic circuits of knowledge, measurements, devices, organizations, institutional practices, and governance regimes (Linton and Budds 2014). Social and political processes constitute and mediate these circuits that allocate water fl ows and hydrological services through communities and across regions to water users and bene fi ciaries. Thus, our starting point is to frame the problem of drinking water provision in the Global North in terms of relational patterns of water access, everyday water practices, and the experiential or subjective dimensions of the hydrosocial cycle that dynamically reconstitute the waterscape (Sultana 2011; Jepson and Lee 2014). The challenge is how to operationalize the relational approach in a manner that is analytically robust, while offering opportunities to translate results into public policy that can materially improve drinking water quality for the marginalized in the Global North.

This article contributes to recent work on domestic water provision among marginalized communities in the Global North. First, we build on previous studies to advance the multidimensional concept of water security as a promising metric to assess the everyday experiences of water (Jepson 2014). Water security, de fi ned in terms of human development, is considered adequate, reliable, and affordable water for a healthy life (Lundqvist, Appasamy, and Nelliyat 2003; Wolf 2011; Cook and Bakker 2012). One can re fi ne water security for human development into three dimensions: water access, quality, and water affect (Wutich and Ragsdale 2008; Jepson 2014). This framework allows for the assessment of how gaps in water reliability, quality, and affordability erode the functioning for basic human activities. Water security includes, but is not limited to, water access; other characteristics such as affordability, quality, and the subjective experiences of domestic water provision are equally important. This is different than the concept of water poverty, which primarily addresses water access as a function of scarcity in terms of infrastructural and environmental issues at larger scales. Second, we examine the question of water security at the household level. By documenting water security variability among households in similar low-income populations, we might reveal contributing factors to water insecurity that have been previously overlooked at other scales.

Nowhere else does the relationship between domestic water provision and social exclusion come into such stark relief than in communities called colonias.

Colonias are impoverished and mostly unincorporated subdivisions populated by Mexican Americans located on urban fringes or in rural areas along the 2,000-mile U.S. -Mexico border. Although conditions have improved over the past decades (Durst and Ward 2013), colonias, home to more than 400,000 residents, are typically characterized by inadequate water and sanitation services, lack of electricity, and unpaved roads (Ward 1999; Donelson and Esparza 2010; McDonald and Grineski 2012; Of fi ce of the Attorney General 2012; Korc and Ford 2013). Recent work has examined the complex and dynamic social life of water prevalent in border colonias (Jepson and Lee 2014; Vandewalle and Jepson 2014). This article poses a further question: What household-level characteristics predict water insecurity within border colonias?

After placing the study in its regional context and describing the study ' s qualitative research and survey methods, we propose a novel measurement to assess household water insecurity and then employ two logistic regression models (binary and ordered) to identify household characteristics that are likely to result in household water insecurity. In the binary logistic regression model, the dependent variable is water insecurity. In the ordered logistic regression model, we use the natural order of dependent variables (water secure, marginally water secure, marginally water insecure, water insecure) where higher categories indicate increased household water insecurity. Our analysis, although preliminary, is signi fi cant because it is the fi rst regression model using a measurement of water security at the household scale.

Our results yield some unexpected fi ndings concerning the relevance of immigration status to household water insecurity. Notwithstanding some weaknesses in the study, it is clear that adequate, reliable, and affordable water for a healthy life is a ' material emblem of citizenship ' (Bakker 2010, 55); for colonias communities on the border, immigration status might in fl uence household water insecurity more than previously expected. Broadly, these results underscore the need to examine the social and political determinants of household water insecurity in marginalized communities rather than ascribing water insecurity to technical gaps in water delivery systems.

## Household Water Insecurity Along the U.S.-Mexico Border

The waterscape on the Texas -Mexico border is de fi ned by complex hydrosocial interactions among institutions, organizations, and technologies that allocate the fl ow of water across the region and through infrastructure to different water users (Jepson 2012; Jepson and Brannstrom 2015). Rio Grande water eventually fi nds its way to poor households through circuits of irrigation-district canals, quasi-public community water networks, inadequate household connections, water vending machines, and garden hoses

Figure 1 Study sites: El Paso County and Hidalgo County. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

to be stored in fi fty-gallon barrels, buckets, or fi ve-gallon plastic bottles. A fragmented regime of water governance institutions, water markets, housing codes, and private corporations direct the water fl ow to households in border colonias. The focus of this study is two of the poorest regions in the United States: (1) Hidalgo County in the Lower Rio Grande Valley, with the largest concentration of colonias (over 240,000 people), and (2) El Paso County in West Texas (Figure 1). The boxes indicated in Figures 1

Table 1 Income, poverty, and plumbing data for selected census tracts in study sites

|                                                     | Hidalgo County   | El Paso County   |
|-----------------------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Average per capita income                           | $9,938           | $15,257          |
| %households with income below federal poverty level | 44.3             | 24.4             |
| %households that lack complete plumbing             | 7.07             | 5.6              |

Note:

Data from U.S. Census Bureau (2010).

and 2 are sections of each county selected for consistency and to minimize exogenous factors. Demographic data compare study census tracts levels of poverty and households without complete plumbing 1 (Table 1, Figure 2).

Residents in border colonias have few reliable, affordable, and adequate options for drinking water. They face a ' no-win ' waterscape. Existing domestic water provision is available but expensive, highly variable, and unreliable, and water quality is demonstratively precarious. Residents face service interruptions due to lack of payment, unreliable water service, and concerns over tap water quality. Some households avoid existing water utilities altogether and use garden hoses to connect to a neighbor ' s water meter (Figure 3).

Several households not connected to community water service might live in areas not served by a water supply corporation. For example, 4,500 residents living in sixty El Paso colonias are not connected to community water systems. In other cases, households cannot afford the water connection costs, or they cannot afford the household improvements necessary to comply with building codes, a prerequisite for waterline hookups. Instead, residents rely on water delivery trucks to fi ll large 1,500- to 2,500-gallon plastic storage tanks. Trucked water, despite claims to the contrary, is not considered potable, and many residents experience skin rashes due to contamination (Graham and VanDerslice 2007; McDonald and Grineski 2012; Figure 4). Finally, most households, whether connected to a community water system or not, depend on unreliable water vending machines because of generalized tap water quality concerns (Chaidez et al. 1999; Schillinger and Knorr 2004; Figure 5).

## Data and Methods

## Household Surveys

Qualitative research was conducted in Hidalgo County during nine visits between January 2009 and August 2011. The fi rst author led a research team, including a local community health worker ( promotora ), as they conducted forty-one semistructured interviews and two focus groups. The fi rst author used qualitative information to develop a household water security survey, which was then completed for seventy-one households in Hidalgo County (sixty-eight households used in study) in July 2012. The second author conducted sixty-six household surveys in El Paso County and Do ~ na Ana County (New Mexico) in July 2013. We used the State of Texas colonia classi fi cation system to stratify our sample of households (Parcher and Humberson 2009). We selected households in eleven different colonias in eastern Hidalgo County and fourteen different colonias in eastern El Paso, with households representing each colonia classi fi cation: red, yellow, green, and unclassi fi ed (Table 2). We also surveyed colonias not classi fi ed in the Texas database. We removed six household surveys from adjacent counties in New Mexico when we ran the logistic regression models to limit our analysis to Texas counties. The surveys were conducted in Spanish or English with the available head of household. The survey, which took between thirty and forty- fi ve minutes, was divided into four parts: (1) household demographics (age, occupation, health care access, country of origin, etc., for each household member), (2) water usages and practices, (3) series of yes -no questions related to the three water dimensions, and (4) income and wealth. Descriptive statistics of households are provided in Table 3.

## Data Analysis

We analyzed household survey data using three techniques. First, we used an experiential scalogram technique (Guttman 1945) to draw inferences about a latent variable (water insecurity) in the observed data (Guttman 1945; Guest 2000). In this study we created three scalograms for each dimension of water security. Guttman scalograms provide a measurement of cumulative or progressive objective, subjective, and biocultural experiences; it has been particularly useful when related to domestic water access and food security (Wutich and Ragsdale 2008; Hadley and Wutich 2009; Stevenson et al. 2012). For Hidalgo County, we used household scales and classi fi cations from previously published data (Jepson 2014), and we followed the same procedure to create the water security scales and classi fi cation for households in El Paso.

Survey item responses were entered 0 or 1 into a respondent-by-item matrix for each dimension of water security, with each row representing a household respondent and each column representing an indicator for each dimension of water security (water access, water quality acceptability, water distress). Guttman scalograms order item responses such that the individual who responded more positively will rank higher than an individual who responded negatively, and the positions of the item responses and individuals are given numerical values. Three conventional measures of reliability for each scale were calculated: coef fi cient of reproducibility (CR), coef fi cient of

2A

Figure 2 Census tract data for study counties and tracts (per capita income, poverty, complete plumbing). (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

scalability (CS), and minimal marginal reproducibility (MMR). The CR should be greater than 0.90, CS more than 0.60, and MMR less than 0.90 (Guest 2000; Peregrine, Ember, and Ember 2004; Table 4). 2

The experience-based indicators that correspond with survey item responses used in scale development are described in the idealized Guttman scales (Table 5). For example, households that experienced the lowest water access reported the presence of all the indicators, but households with the most water access experienced none or the fi rst listed indicator. In addition, Table 5 reports the number of households that positively responded to the presence of each indicator. For example, water was not affordable in 84 percent of Hidalgo County households and in 91 percent of El Paso households. Similarly,

Figure 3 Two homes that might share a water connection through an outside faucet; no other water or sanitation connection was observed for these dwellings. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Household water storage tank. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

Figure 5 Water vending machines. (Color figure available online.)

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Table 5 reports other positive responses or presence for each dimension of water security (access, quality, distress).

Second, we clustered households into four groups of water security using the three scale scores by applying the centroid method and squared Euclidean distance measurement to create a dendrogram in S C software (TIBCO 2010). The four household water security groups or classes are (1) water secure, (2) marginally water secure, (3) marginally water insecure, and (4) water insecure. We used R software to test the hypothesis of no difference between two or more groups among the four groups using the nonparametric

Table 2 Classification criteria for colonias

| Health risk   | Classification   | Description   |
|---------------|------------------|---------------|
| High          | Red              | One of the following is lacking:  Adequate wastewater disposal  Potable water supply Platted               |
| Medium        | Yellow           |  Colonias platted with a potable water supply and adequate wastewater disposal system but are lacking in one of the following:  Trash collection  Paved roads  Passable roads during weather conditions No flooding during precipitation event               |
| Low           | Green            |  All of the following are present:  Platted  Potable water supply  Adequate wastewater disposal  Trash collection  Paved roads  Passable roads during weather conditions  No flooding during precipitation event               |

multiresponse permutation procedure (MRPP; Biondini, Mielke, and Berry 1988; Mielke and Berry 2001; Figure 6). We could reject the null hypothesis because the A statistics (measure of effect size) were acceptable and p values were signi fi cant for both counties.

Third, we used household survey data and household water security classi fi cations to run two logistic regressions to determine which household characteristics will more likely result in water insecurity. We compared households that fell between 50 and 99 percent below the federal poverty level (FPL) and those households 49 percent or below with those above the FPL as our dummy variable. We also

Table 3 Household characteristics

|                |    | Household demographics (average)   | Household demographics (average)   | Household demographics (average)   | Household demographics (average)   | Household monthly income   | Household monthly income   | Water   | Water             |
|----------------|----|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|------------------------------------|----------------------------|----------------------------|---------|-------------------|
| Location       | N  | Adult                              | Child                              | Over 65                            | Household members                  | Total $                    | %of federal poverty level  | Expense | Affordability (%) |
| Hidalgo County |    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                            |                            |         |                   |
| Green          | 8  | 3.00                               | 3.12                               | 0.13                               | 6.25                               | 1,168                      | 40.53                      | $77     | 9.1               |
| Yellow         | 19 | 2.36                               | 1.84                               | 0.37                               | 4.58                               | 1,895                      | 97.50 a                    | $59     | 5.8 a             |
| Red            | 15 | 2.06                               | 0.80                               | 0.60                               | 3.46                               | 1,381                      | 70.00                      | $55     | 7.0               |
| Unknown        | 29 | 2.48                               | 2.58                               | 0.03                               | 5.13                               | 1,307                      | 48.80                      | $67     | 8.3               |
| Total          | 71 | 172                                | 147                                | 18                                 | 338                                |                            |                            |         |                   |
| El Paso County |    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                                    |                            |                            |         |                   |
| Green          | 6  | 2.33                               | 1.33                               | 0.00                               | 3.67                               | 1,033                      | 49.14                      | $65     | 10.9              |
| Yellow         | 18 | 1.72                               | 1.28                               | 0.17                               | 3.17                               | 1,167                      | 86.37                      | $67     | 16.0              |
| Red            | 19 | 1.89                               | 1.16                               | 0.37                               | 3.42                               | 1,260                      | 85.36                      | $122    | 15.7              |
| Unknown        | 17 | 2.00                               | 1.59                               | 0.35                               | 3.94                               | 1,180                      | 60.43                      | $69     | 6.8               |
| Total          | 60 | 115                                | 80                                 | 16                                 | 211                                |                            |                            |         |                   |

Table 4 Guttman measurements of reliability

|                             |   CR |   CS |   MMR |
|-----------------------------|------|------|-------|
| Hidalgo County              |      |      |       |
| Water access                | 0.92 | 0.86 |  0.43 |
| Water quality acceptability | 0.93 | 0.83 |  0.54 |
| Water distress              | 0.91 | 0.86 |  0.36 |
| El Paso County              |      |      |       |
| Water access                | 0.94 | 0.87 |  0.5  |
| Water quality acceptability | 0.95 | 0.9  |  0.5  |
| Water distress              | 0.91 | 0.83 |  0.49 |

Note: CR D coefficient of reproducibility; CS D coefficient of scalability; MMR D minimal marginal reproducibility.

classi fi ed households in terms of age composition (minors and adults; minors, adults, and elderly [65 and over]; only adults; only elderly). We included dwelling information, such as type (manufactured home or house) and years in residence. We also wanted to test whether the State of Texas colonia classi fi cation on ' health risk ' predicted household water insecurity.

Field research and emerging literature on immigration status and immigrant families ' quotidian negotiation to access utilities informed our decision to include immigration status as a possible predictor for household water security (Stevens, West-Wright, and Ysai

Table 5 Idealized scale indicators and positive responses (% of households), Hidalgo and El Paso Counties

| Hidalgo                                                             |   %households | El Paso                                                                               |   %households |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------|
| Water access scale                                                  |               | Water access scale                                                                    |               |
| Water is not affordable                                             |            84 | Water is not affordable                                                               |            91 |
| Conserves water/reallocates resources to pay for water              |            71 | Conserves water/reallocates resources to pay for water                                |            74 |
| Lacked money to pay for water/missed bill                           |            51 | Physical burden to clear tank/ garrafones                                             |            56 |
| Problems with water pressure                                        |            41 | Lacked money to pay for water/missed bill                                             |            35 |
| Problems buying water/paying bills (transport, physical burden)     |            37 | Physical burden to buy water at vending point/haul water                              |            33 |
| Water cut or interrupted                                            |            18 | Problems buying water/paying bills                                                    |            30 |
| Shares water meter or given water                                   |             7 | Shares water meter or given water                                                     |            27 |
| Water quality acceptability                                         |               | Water quality acceptability                                                           |               |
| More than 50% drinking water from bottles or water vending machine  |            87 | More than 50% drinking water from bottles or water vending machine                    |            76 |
| Does not disinfect container ( garrafon ) after each use            |            78 | Tap or trucked water has unpalatable taste or smell (chlorine, soil, metallic, salty) |            71 |
| Tap water has unpalatable taste or smell (chlorine, soil, metallic) |            75 | Tap or trucked water visually unclean (dirty, cloudy, floaters)                       |            42 |
| Water containers ( garrafones ) older than 6 months                 |            65 | Does not disinfect container ( garrafon /tank) after each use                         |            36 |
| Tap water visually unclean (dirty, cloudy, floaters)                |            26 | Water containers ( garrafones ) older than 6 months                                   |            24 |
| Believes tap water made someone in household ill                    |            21 |                                                                                       |               |
| Water distress scale                                                |               | Water distress scale                                                                  |               |
| Worried                                                             |            66 | Dissatisfied                                                                          |            58 |
| Disgusted                                                           |            44 | Troubled or uneasy                                                                    |            53 |
| Troubled or uneasy                                                  |            40 | Worried                                                                               |            47 |
| Dissatisfied                                                        |            29 | Disgusted                                                                             |            47 |
| Frightened or scared                                                |            28 | Argued about water/negative comments to others                                        |            45 |
| Argued about water/negative comments to others                      |            18 | Fear                                                                                  |            42 |

2010; Kaushal, Waldfogel, and Wight 2013; White et al. 2014). 3 Considerable federal immigration enforcement through the Secure Communities program and the daily operations of the U.S. Border Patrol, with a federal mandate to search for unauthorized migrants within 100 miles of the border, make everyday life a constant and complex negotiation for immigrants (Menjivar 2011; Varsanyi et al. 2012). In this context, migrants make strategic efforts to negotiate everyday life, dangers, and insecurities (Garcia 2014). Furthermore, the existing immigration regime creates a chronic sense of insecurity and psychosocial distress and anxiety, particularly for mixedstatus households who fear separation through deportation (Brabeck, Brinton Lykes, and Hershberg 2011). Taken together, immigration status merited inclusion in the model as the legal precarity might create a spillover effect in terms of household water (in)security.

Figure 6 Household water security (HWS) classification by scale (mean scale score).

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

We did not explicitly ask immigration status of household members; however, a combination of responses from several survey questions -place of birth, sources of income (including public bene fi t), time of residency, insurance coverage -allowed us to deduce and estimate documented or undocumented status. We noted households receiving Temporary Assistance for Needy Families, Social Security (including SSI Disability), and Supplementary Nutrition Program (SNAP, or food stamps) because monthly bene fi ts require documented status. We also noted whether the distribution of these bene fi ts varied between and within each household. For example, we surveyed households in which all of the children under the age of eighteen would be eligible for Children ' s Health Insurance Program or Medicaid but not all of them receive the bene fi ts. Similarly, a household might receive SNAP bene fi ts for some children but not as a household or at the maximum eligible under current state provision. We recognize that SNAP eligibility for adults is variable, but since July 2002 children under eighteen who are legal residents are eligible for bene fi ts (Wight et al. 2014). This intrahousehold variability, paired with other data on birthplace, strongly suggests whether the household is a mixedstatus or all-undocumented household. If no proxy evidence for residency status was obtained, we classifi ed the household as all documented.

explanatory variable indicate a greater likelihood that the outcome (water insecurity) will occur. An odds ratio less than 1.0 indicates a negative effect or a lower likelihood that the outcome will occur. Second, we performed an ordered logistic regression (OLR) model, which is similar to the binary logistic regression model but for multiple outcome variables that are categorical (water secure, marginally water secure, marginally water insecure, and water insecure). OLR models the relation between the previous independent variables and the four household water security classifi cations while controlling for the covariates. Regression results are reported as adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95 percent con fi dence intervals (CIs) for moving to higher water insecurity categories versus remaining in the same category. That is, OLR models cumulative probability, or the factors that increase or decrease the likelihood of being in a higher category of household water insecurity. For the OLR, an odds ratio higher than 1.0 for the explanatory variable indicates a greater likelihood of being in higher water insecurity categories versus remaining in the same category. Conversely, an odds ratio less than 1.0 indicates a negative effect or a lower likelihood of being in higher water insecurity categories versus remaining in the same category.

We conducted two types of statistical analyses using R software (R Core Team 2014). First, we employed a binary logistic regression, which estimates coef fi cients and reports an odds ratio for explanatory variables on the outcome variable. A binary logistic regression is an appropriate statistical model because the outcome variable is binary and categorical (water secure -water insecure). Odds ratios higher than 1.0 for the

## Results

Comparing Scalograms and Household Water Security

Guttman scalograms for each of the three dimensions of water security offer a means to compare regional differences among colonias surveyed in El Paso and

Table 6 Water security scales and household water security classifications

|                             | Hidalgo County a   | Hidalgo County a   | El Paso County b   | El Paso County b   |
|-----------------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|--------------------|
|                             | No. households     | %households        | No. households     | %households        |
| Water access                |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Adequate water access       | 4                  | 6                  | 5                  | 8                  |
| Marginal water access       | 35                 | 51                 | 31                 | 52                 |
| Low water access            | 23                 | 33                 | 7                  | 12                 |
| Very low water access       | 6                  | 9                  | 17                 | 28                 |
| Water quality acceptability |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Acceptable water quality    | 6                  | 9                  | 13                 | 22                 |
| Marginal acceptability      | 23                 | 34                 | 8                  | 13                 |
| Low acceptability           | 22                 | 32                 | 18                 | 30                 |
| Very low acceptability      | 17                 | 25                 | 21                 | 35                 |
| Water distress              |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Low water distress          | 13                 | 19                 | 22                 | 37                 |
| Marginal water distress     | 27                 | 40                 | 10                 | 17                 |
| High water distress         | 18                 | 26                 | 8                  | 13                 |
| Very high water distress    | 10                 | 15                 | 20                 | 33                 |
| Household water security    |                    |                    |                    |                    |
| Water secure                | 7                  | 10                 | 6                  | 10                 |
| Marginally water secure     | 24                 | 35                 | 15                 | 25                 |
| Water insecure              | 21                 | 31                 | 19                 | 32                 |
| Highly water insecure       | 16                 | 24                 | 20                 | 33                 |

Figure 7 Water security classes for surveyed households in El Paso and Hidalgo counties.

<!-- image -->

Hidalgo Counties (Table 6). The analysis clustered scale scores so that each household was classi fi ed in terms of household water security: (1) water secure, (2) marginally water secure, (3) marginally water insecure, or (4) water insecure (Table 6, Figure 7). In general, more households are water secure in Hidalgo County than in El Paso County. Although the analysis indicates that 10 percent of the colonia households in both regions are water secure, more than a third of the surveyed households in Hidalgo County are marginally water secure (35%), whereas only a quarter of the households in El Paso County are marginally water secure (25%). Similarly, the percentage of households classi fi ed as marginally water insecure is almost equal in each county (32 percent, El Paso; 31 percent, Hidalgo), but one third of the surveyed households in El Paso County are water insecure (33 percent), whereas a quarter of the households in Hidalgo County (24 percent) are classi fi ed as water insecure.

## Binary Logistic Regression

Table 7 summarizes the outcome and explanatory variables used in the regression models. Table 8 presents the results from the logistic regression model for household water insecurity. Overall the model is reasonably strong as indicated by the likelihood ratio chi-square value, which is statistically signi fi cant ( p &lt; 0.05).

Household immigration status is an important factor to consider in household water insecurity. The analysis indicates that ' mixed status ' households were 4.2 times more likely to be water insecure than households with members who were all documented (legal residents or U.S. citizens). Households in which all members are unauthorized residents increase the likelihood (1.2 times) of water insecurity, but the results were insigni fi cant. Birthplace, which is different than legal status, also signi fi cantly affected household water insecurity. Households with both U.S.- and foreignborn members are 20 percent less likely to be water insecure than households in which all members were born in the United States.

Other socioeconomic variables such as size of household increase the likelihood of household water insecurity, but the results are all insigni fi cant. Poverty level runs in the direction anticipated. Households between 50 percent and 99 percent of the FPL are almost twice as likely to be water insecure than those above the FPL, and the households below 49 percent of the FPL are 1.5 times more likely to be water insecure than those above the FPL. Households with members that include children, adults, and elderly are 6.3 times more likely to be water insecure than households with only adults or only elderly. Although the p value is slightly more than 0.01 ( p value D 0.127), it approaches signi fi cance and therefore is an important fi nding.

The model also considers residential factors on household water insecurity. Living in a manufactured home (recreational vehicle [RV] or mobile home) was not an important predictor of household water insecurity. The model con fi rms expectations, however, that households in ' red ' colonias were more likely (4.7 times) to be water insecure as compared to households in the ' green ' classi fi ed colonia. Although living in a colonia classi fi ed ' red ' signi fi cantly increased the likelihood of water insecurity, the other colonia classi fi cations are poor predictors of household water insecurity. Surprisingly, the model indicates that

Table 7 Definitions and descriptive statistics for outcome and explanatory variables

|                                                                                                            |    M |   SD |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------|------|
| Outcome variables                                                                                          |      |      |
| Household water security (binary)                                                                          | 0.6  | 0.5  |
| Water secure D 0                                                                                           |      |      |
| Water insecure D 1 Household water security (ordered)                                                      | 2.8  | 0.98 |
| Water secure D 1                                                                                           |      |      |
| Marginally water secure D 2                                                                                |      |      |
| Marginally water insecure D 3                                                                              |      |      |
| Water insecure D 4                                                                                         |      |      |
| Explanatory variables                                                                                      |      |      |
| Socioeconomic variables                                                                                    |      |      |
| Size of household                                                                                          | 3.97 | 2.25 |
| Poverty level (1 D above 100%, 2 D 50-99%, 3 D 49% and below)                                              | 2.32 | 0.76 |
| Receiving SNAP/TANF/SSI (yes D 1, no D 0)                                                                  | 0.59 | 0.5  |
| Children under 18                                                                                          | 1.77 | 1.77 |
| Persons over 65                                                                                            | 0.29 | 0.58 |
| Residency status (1 D all documented, 2 D mixed, 3 D all undocumented)                                     | 1.71 | 0.71 |
| Birthplace (1 D all U.S., 2 D mixed, 3 D all non-U.S.)                                                     | 2.16 | 0.61 |
| Housing composition (1 D child and adult; 2 D child, adult, and elderly; 3 D only adult; 4 D only elderly) | 1.87 | 1.03 |
| Dwelling                                                                                                   |      |      |
| Type of dwelling (1 D RV/mobile home, 0 D house)                                                           | 0.46 | 0.5  |
| Years in current residence                                                                                 | 9.99 | 7.93 |
| Location variables                                                                                         |      |      |
| Colonia type (green D 1, yellow D 2, red D 3, unknown D 4)                                                 | 2.92 | 1.02 |

Note: N D 130. SNAP D Supplementary Nutrition Program; TANF D Temporary Assistance for Needy Families; SSI D Social Security Insurance; RV D recreational vehicle.

Table 8 Results of binary logistic regression and ordered logistic regression

|                                           | Binary logistic regression   | Binary logistic regression   | Binary logistic regression   | Ordered logistic regression   | Ordered logistic regression   | Ordered logistic regression   |
|-------------------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
|                                           | Odds ratio                   | Z score                      | p value                      | Odds ratio                    | t value                       | p value                       |
| Socioeconomic variables                   |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Size of household                         | 1.232                        | 1.508                        | 0.131                        | 1.050                         | 0.549                         | 0.582                         |
| Poverty level                             |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Above 100%                                | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                             | -                             | -                             |
| 50-99%                                    | 1.990                        | 0.987                        | 0.323                        | 1.997                         | 1.142                         | 0.253                         |
| Below 49%                                 | 1.582                        | 0.639                        | 0.533                        | 2.690                         | 1.545                         | 0.122                         |
| Receive SNAP/TANF/SSI                     | 0.878                        | ¡ 0.248                      | 0.804                        | 0.891                         | -0.263                        | 0.792                         |
| Residency status                          |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| All documented                            | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                             | -                             | -                             |
| Mixed-status household                    | 4.227                        | 2.499                        | 0.012*                       | 2.471                         | 2.049                         | 0.040**                       |
| All undocumented                          | 1.261                        | 0.263                        | 0.797                        | 3.035                         | 1.546                         | 0.121                         |
| Birthplace                                |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| All U.S.                                  | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                             | -                             | -                             |
| Mixed-birthplace household                | 0.200                        | -2.027                       | 0.042*                       | 0.386                         | -1.498                        | 0.134                         |
| All non-U.S.                              | 1.282                        | 0.263                        | 0.792                        | 0.484                         | -0.944                        | 0.344                         |
| Household composition                     |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Child/adult                               | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                             | -                             | -                             |
| Child/adult/elderly                       | 6.330                        | 1.523                        | 0.127                        | 2.829                         | 1.392                         | 0.163                         |
| Only adults/elderly                       | 0.914                        | -0.140                       | 0.888                        | 1.490                         | 0.734                         | 0.462                         |
| Only elderly                              | 0.394                        | -0.834                       | 0.404                        | 0.595                         | -0.523                        | 0.600                         |
| Dwelling                                  |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Home type (0 D house, 1 D RV/mobile home) | 0.727                        | -0.726                       | 0.468                        | 0.919                         | -0.237                        | 0.812                         |
| Time in residence (years)                 | 1.019                        | 0.618                        | 0.536                        | 1.016                         | 0.665                         | 0.505                         |
| Location variables                        |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Colonia type                              |                              |                              |                              |                               |                               |                               |
| Green                                     | -                            | -                            | -                            | -                             | -                             | -                             |
| Yellow                                    | 0.819                        | -0.257                       | 0.7972                       | 1.405                         | 0.559                         | 0.575                         |
| Red                                       | 4.698                        | 1.788                        | 0.0737 C                     | 7.860                         | 3.020                         | 0.002**                       |
| Unknown                                   | 1.201                        | 0.234                        | 0.8147                       | 1.690                         | 0.848                         | 0.396                         |

Note: Likelihood ratio x 2 (16) D 28.21*. Model p value D 0.0297. SNAP D Supplementary Nutrition Program; TANF D Temporary Assistance for Needy Families; SSI D Social Security Insurance; RV D recreational vehicle.

* p &lt; 0.05.

C p &lt; 0.1.

** p &lt; 0.01.

households in ' yellow ' colonias are 81 percent less likely to be water insecure than those in ' green ' colonias, although the result is not signi fi cant. 4 This contrasts with colonias that are unclassi fi ed, where households in these neighborhoods are 1.2 times more likely to be water insecure than those in the ' green ' colonias.

## Ordered Logistic Regression

The OLR model reports many similar relationships between the independent and dependent variable (household water insecurity) as the fi rst binary logistic regression but with some notable differences (Table 8). Households with residents of mixed documentation are 2.4 times more likely to be classi fi ed in a higher category of household water insecurity than households with all members documented. Although signi fi cant, this is less than predicted in the binary logistic regression model. The OLR model also indicates that households with all undocumented residents are three times more likely to be classi fi ed in higher levels of household water insecurity. Although this fi nding was not statistically signi fi cant, the p value was approaching signi fi cance and therefore we consider an important relationship between all undocumented households and water insecurity. Households with mixed U.S.- and foreign-born residents are 38 percent less likely to be classi fi ed in higher levels of water insecurity than households with all U.S.-born residents, which is a higher likelihood than in the binary logistic regression. Households with all foreign-born members are also less likely to be in a higher water insecurity category than all U.S.-born households. Although insigni fi cant, it is notable that this is a shift in direction from the binary logistic regression model.

Similar to the binary regression model, other socioeconomic variables, such as size of household, increases the likelihood of household water insecurity, but the results are insigni fi cant. In addition, relative poverty level runs in the direction anticipated, but results from our analysis are all insigni fi cant. Households between 50 and 99 percent of the FPL are about twice as likely to be in a higher household water insecurity category than those above the FPL, a very similar result from the binary regression. Households below 49 percent of the FPL are 2.6 times more likely to be in a higher water insecure category than those above the FPL, which is notably different than the result from the binary regression. Similarly, households that receive public bene fi t run in the negative direction to household water insecurity but, as with the binary logistic regression model, this is statistically insigni fi cant. As in the binary logistic regression model, households with members that include children, adults, and elderly are more likely to be water insecure (2.8 times) than households with only adults or only elderly. Although the p value is more than 0.01, it approaches signi fi cance with a p value of 0.163

and therefore is an important fi nding. The OLR model con fi rms that dwelling type and time in residence are poor predictors of household water insecurity.

The OLR model presents a clearer relationship between households living in ' red ' colonias and higher levels of household water insecurity than those in the binary regression. These households are 7.8 times more likely to be in a higher category of household water insecurity and with a stronger signi fi cance value. In the binary regression model, households in ' yellow ' colonias are less likely to be water insecure than households in ' green ' colonias, but the OLR model changes sthe direction of this relationship. There is an increased chance that a household in the ' yellow ' category will be observed in a higher category of household water insecurity but, again, the p value value indicates that this is not signi fi cant.

## Discussion

Our research suggests that households living in border colonias -communities that are both connected to community water service and not connected to community water service -face signi fi cant levels of household water insecurity. Water insecurity varied, however, within similar subdivisions; thus, our work challenges the notion that colonias households form a homogenous group in terms of living conditions and access to resources. Our analysis attempted to determine what household-level characteristics would predict water insecurity in colonias households. The binary logistic regression modeled signi fi cant predictors for presence of household water insecurity; the OLR modeled the odds for a household moving to higher water insecurity categories versus remaining in the same category. Overall, household water insecurity is dif fi cult to predict with statistical signi fi cance, but there were some unexpected results in our fi ndings, particularly if we examine our preliminary fi ndings in comparison with recent scholarship on experience of insecurity of everyday life on the U.S. -Mexico border.

First, we would have expected relative poverty to increase the likelihood of water insecurity, but our results indicate that the degree to which a household lives in poverty might not strongly in fl uence water insecurity among this population. Although the reasons need to be investigated further, one can deduce that water is not affordable for most of the households because most are impoverished, and a majority of the surveyed households experience problems buying water or engage in practices to economize water use. Therefore, differences in terms of household water insecurity might re fl ect the experiences related to the other dimensions of water insecurity (quality and distress) and not to different levels of affordability or access.

Second, we would also expect that living in a mobile home would increase the likelihood of water insecurity because those units can be more easily located on land

that does not necessarily follow water and sanitation codes. Moreover, colonia residents more frequently rely on the secondary market to buy aging mobile homes and RVs (Durst 2014); therefore, the internal infrastructure could be signi fi cantly depreciated, degrading water quality through the connection between the housing and the water supply. In addition, the literature would suggest that an increase in residence time might decrease the likelihood of water insecurity because of housing consolidation and dwelling improvements made over the life course (Durst and Ward 2013). Yet, our analysis indicates that factors related to the dwelling (e.g., dwelling types [mobile or RV vs. house] and time in residence [years]) do not increase the likelihood of household water insecurity to any signi fi cant degree.

Although we were not surprised that households in ' red ' colonias have a higher likelihood of being water insecure than households in ' green ' colonias, the result that other state-mandated colonias classi fi cations were poor predictors of household water insecurity was unexpected. In many cases, especially in the El Paso ' red ' colonias, lack of either water or sanitation services set the stage for household water insecurity, whereas in Hidalgo County, households in ' red ' colonias lacked mainly sanitation. Moreover, although classi fi cation was a predictor, we documented various household levels of water insecurity in ' red ' colonias. Therefore, we can only conclude that the colonia classi fi cation system, although perhaps helpful in identifying the worst-case scenarios, is an inadequate proxy to assess the larger and more diverse experiences of household-scale water insecurity.

Finally, our analysis revealed a major unexpected predictor of household water insecurity -immigration status of household members -with mixed-status households as the most signi fi cant predictor of household water insecurity. Our fi ndings, paired with existing research on mixed-status families, suggest that the quotidian behaviors and choices in response to precarious immigration status might ' spill over ' into other insecurities, including household water insecurity. Negotiating the immigration regime is de fi ned by avoiding exposure to authorities. This can be achieved in terms of location of residences, and many colonias provide this protection as they are within the sparsely patrolled rural and periurban areas. Connection to public services might also be a perceived vulnerability and exposure point. Another form of ' protection, ' con fi rmed anecdotally in fi eld research, is the reliance or dependency on private water delivery -either trucked or vending machines. This allows individuals to manage chronic problems of water access and quality without directly addressing problems with the water supply corporations or municipal services. The impact could include increased costs of water, dependency on unregulated water sources, and increased water distress. Exploring these speci fi c interactions is beyond the scope of this study, but we believe that future research should explore how immigration status might in fl uence interactions with local water governance regimes as a signi fi cant factor in water insecurity.

Several important limitations should be considered when reviewing the results of this study and could inform future research. Although the study included an adequate number of households, a larger sample size might improve the robustness. Second, housing tenure -either rental, ownership (title), or contractfor-deed ( fi nal or interim) -would be another important variable to include in future surveys. Our current survey did not delineate the speci fi c status of housing tenure, so we could not include this variable in our current model. As time in residence, the variable we used, might autocorrelate with housing tenure, future research would have to determine the best independent variable. Third, our analysis provided preliminary means to assess gaps in water reliability, quality, and affordability, but we recognize the need to re fi ne the scalogram and classi fi cation analysis. For example, household water security classi fi cations were generated based on experiential scales re fl ective of each place studied yet were aggregated in the regression analyses. That said, our study is in line with the experience-based scales, as these communities are similar in terms of culture and socioeconomic demographics.

## Conclusion

Ourstudy advanced current research on domestic water provision among marginalized communities in the Global North by applying methods to quantify household water insecurity. The empirical focus of this study was low-income, periurban and rural communities in two impoverished regions on the Texas -Mexico border: the Lower Rio Grande Valley and west Texas. The novel scale and classi fi cation system offered a systematic means to assess the three dimensions of household water security in a common measurement for households for two study areas. The results reveal notable regional differences. Households in both regions have an equal percentage classi fi ed as water secure, but there is a higher percentage of households surveyed in El Paso classi fi ed as marginally water insecure or water insecure. We also used household water security classifi cations developed from household survey data to run two statistical analyses: binary logistic regression and OLR. We determined that demographics, poverty, and housing infrastructure are relatively weak and statistically insigni fi cant predictors of household water insecurity, whereas immigration status signi fi cantly increased the likelihood of household water insecurity. Our study suggests that future research should investigate why immigration status might be a predictor of water insecurity, repeat the logistic regression analysis with a larger sample size, and broaden the geographical distribution of study areas to advance our knowledge of the unevenness of household water insecurity. These research directions will enable further tests of the

household water security measurement as a robust, reliable indicator, similar to the food security measurements, in the Global North. &amp;

## Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Laura Trevi ~ no, research participants, community center volunteers, and promotoras for their help and support during the research process. We also want to thank David Cairns, Christian Brannstrom, Heather Lee, Vicenta Placensia, Nancy Plankey-Videla, and Adam Naito.

## Funding

The research on which this article is based was funded by a grant (BSC-0924232) from the National Science Foundation (United States). The usual disclaimers apply.

## Notes

- 1 The U.S. Census Bureau de fi nes complete plumbing as hot and cold running water, a fl ush toilet, and a bathtub or shower. All three facilities must be located inside the dwelling. Housing units are classi fi ed as lacking complete plumbing when any of the three facilities is not present.
- 3 Over 4.5 million U.S.-born children have parents who are undocumented and 1 million children under 18 are undocumented (Passel and Cohn 2011). This supports the fi ndings that 76 percent of children in Mexican immigrant families lived in ' mixed status ' households between 2001 and 2011 (Kaushal et al. 2013, 205).
- 2 Fewer than nine indicators might produce a high coef fi cient of reproducibility by chance, but for both data sets the other measurements of acceptability far exceed guidelines.
- 4 This result might be a result from a minimum N and household selection process.

## Literature Cited

- American Communities Survey. 2012. United States Census Bureau: American Communities Survey. http://www.cen sus.gov/acs/www/ (last accessed 15 April 2012).
- Bakker, K. 2010. Privatizing water: Governance failure and the world ' s urban water crisis. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
- Balazs, C., R. Morello-Frosch, A. E. Hubbard, and I. Ray. 2011. Social disparities in nitrate-contaminated drinking water in California ' s San Joaquin Valley. Environmental Health Perspectives 119 (9): 1272.
- Biondini, M. E., P. W. Mielke, Jr., and K. J. Berry. 1988. Data-dependent permutation techniques for the analysis of ecological data. Vegetatio 75 (3): 161 -68.
- Brabeck, K., M. Brinton Lykes, and R. Hershberg. 2011. Framing immigration to and deportation from the United States: Guatemalan and Salvadoran families make meaning of their experiences. Community, Work and Family 14 (3): 275 -96.
- Bradshaw, J., and M. Huby. 2013. Water poverty in England and Wales. Journal of Poverty and Social Justice 21 (2): 137 -48.
- Chaidez, C., P. Rusin, J. Naranjo, and C. P. Gerba. 1999. Microbiological quality of water vending machines. International Journal of Environmental Health Research 9 (3): 197 -206.
- Cook, C., and K. Bakker. 2012. Water security: Debating an emerging paradigm. Global Environmental Change 22 (1): 94 -102.
- Cory, D. C., and T. Rahman. 2009. Environmental justice and enforcement of the safe drinking water act: The Arizona arsenic experience. Ecological Economics 68 (6): 1825 -37.
- Donelson, A. J., and A. X. Esparza. 2010. The colonias reader: Economy, housing, and public health in US -Mexico border colonias . Tuscon: University of Arizona.
- Durst, N. J. 2014. Second-generation policy priorities for colonias and informal settlements in Texas. Housing Policy Debate. doi:10.1080/10511482.2013.879603
- Durst, N., and P. Ward. 2013. Measuring self-help home improvements in Texas colonias: A ten year ' snapshot ' study. Urban Studies 51 (10): 2143 -59.
- Garcia, A. 2014. Hidden in plain sight: How unauthorized migrants strategically assimilate in restrictive localities in California. Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 40 (12): 1895 -1914.
- Graham, G., and J. VanDerslice. 2007. The effectiveness of large household water storage tanks for protecting the quality of drinking water. Journal of Water and Health 5 (3): 307 -13.
- Guest, G. 2000. Using Guttman scaling to rank wealth: Integrating quantitative and qualitative data. Field Methods 12 (4): 346 -57.
- Guttman, L. 1945. A basis for analyzing test -retest reliability. Psychometrika 10 (4): 255 -82.
- Hadley, C., and A. Wutich. 2009. Experience-based measures of food and water security: Bicultural approaches to grounds measures of insecurity. Human Organization 68 (4): 451 -60.
- Harper, K., T. Steger, and R. Fil  c  ak. 2009. Environmental justice and Roma communities in Central and Eastern Europe. Environmental Policy and Governance 19 (4): 251 -68.
- Jepson, W. 2012. Claiming space, claiming water: Contested legal geographies of water in South Texas. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 103 (3): 614 -31.
- ---. 2014. Measuring ' no-win ' waterscapes: Experiencebased scales and classi fi cation approaches to assess household water security in colonias on the US -Mexico border. Geoforum 51:107 -20.
- Jepson, W., and C. Brannstrom. 2015. Techno-nature and the scaling of water governance. In Negotiating scale in water governance , ed. E. Norman, C. Cook, and A. Cohen, 155 -71. London: Ashgate.
- Jepson, W., and H. Lee. 2014. ' If no gasoline, no water ' : Privatizing drinking water quality in South Texas colonias. Environment and Planning A 46 (5): 1032 -48.
- Kaushal, N., J. Waldfogel, and V. Wight. 2013. Food insecurity and SNAP participation in Mexican immigrant families: The impact of the outreach initiative. The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis and Policy 14 (1): 203 -40.
- Korc, M. E., and P. B. Ford. 2013. Application of the Water Poverty Index in border colonias of west Texas. Water Policy 15 (1): 79 -97.
- Laurent,  E. 2011. Issues in environmental justice within the European Union. Ecological Economics 70 (11): 1846 -53.

- Linton, J., and J. Budds. 2014. The hydrosocial cycle: De fi ning and mobilizing a relational-dialectical approach to water. Geoforum 57:170 -80.
- Lukacs, M. 2014. Detroit ' s water war: A tap-shut off that could impact 300,000 people. The Guardian 25 June. http://www.theguardian.com/environment/true-north/2014/ jun/25/detroits-water-war-a-tap-shut-off-that-could-impact300000-people (last accessed 25 June 2014).
- Lundqvist, J., P. Appasamy, and P. Nelliyat. 2003. Dimensions and approaches for third world city water security. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 358 (1440): 1985 -96.
- Mascarenhas, M. 2007. Where the waters divide: First Nations, tainted water and environmental justice in Canada. Local Environment 12 (6): 565 -77.
- McDonald, Y. J., and S. E. Grineski. 2012. Disparities in access to residential plumbing: A binational comparison of environmental injustice in El Paso and Ciudad Ju  arez. Population and Environment 34 (2): 194 -216.
- Menjivar, C. 2011. The power of the law: Central Americans ' legality and everyday life in Pheonix, Arizona. Latino Studies 9:377 -95.
- Mielke, P. W., Jr., and K. J. Berry. 2001. Permutation methods: A distance function approach. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
- Of fi ce of the Attorney General. 2012. Colonias Prevention Program. https://www.oag.state.tx.us/consumer/border/ colonias.shtml (last accessed 15 April 2012).
- Olmstead, S. 2003. What ' s price got to do with it: Water supply and poor communities. Environment and Planning A 45 (10): 21 -34.
- Parcher, J., and D. Humberson. 2009. Using GIS to assess priorities of infrastructure and health needs of colonias along the United States -Mexico border. Journal of Latin American Geography 8 (1): 129 -48.
- Passel, J. S., and S. W. D. Cohn. 2011. Unauthorized immigrant population: National and state trends, 2010 . Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center.
- Patrick, R. J. 2011a. Enhancing water security in Saskatchewan, Canada: An opportunity for a water soft path. Water International 36 (6): 748 -63.
- ---. 2011b. Uneven access to safe drinking water for First Nations in Canada: Connecting health and place through source water protection. Health &amp; Place 17 (1): 386 -89.
- Peregrine, P. N., C. R. Ember, and M. Ember. 2004. Universal patterns in cultural evolution: An empirical analysis using Guttman scaling. American Anthropologist 106 (1): 145 -49.
- R Core Team. 2014. R: A language and environment for statistical computing . Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical Computing. http://www.R-project.org/ (last accessed 7 May 2014).
- Satija, N. 2014. Drinking water systems draw federal concerns. The Texas Tribune. http://www.texastribune.org/ 2014/17/23/texas-lags-behind-addressing-drinking-waterproble/ (last accessed 29 July 2014).
- Schillinger, J., and S. D. V. Knorr. 2004. Drinking-water quality and issues associated with water vending machines in the city of Los Angeles. Journal of Environmental Health 66 (6): 25 -31.
- Stevens, G., C. West-Wright, and K. Ysai. 2010. Health insurance and access to care for families with young children in California, 2001 -2005: Differences by immigration status. Journal of Immigrant Minority Health 12:273 -81.
- Stevenson, E. G. J., L. E. Greene, K. C. Maes, A. Ambelu, Y. A. Tesfaye, R. Rheingans, and C. Hadley. 2012. Water insecurity in three dimensions: An anthropological perspective on water and women ' s psychosocial distress in Ethiopia. Social Science &amp; Medicine 75 (2): 392 -400.
- Sultana, F. (2011). Suffering for water, suffering from water: Emotional geographies of resource access, control and con fl ict. Geoforum 42 (2): 163 -72.
- TIBCO. 2010. TIBCO Spotfire S C 8.2 -Guide to packages . Palo Alto, CA: TIBCO Software.
- U.S. Census Bureau. 2010. American fact fi nder. http:// fact fi nder2.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml (last accessed 24 February 2012).
- Vandewalle, E., and W. Jepson. 2014. Mediating water governance: Point-of-use water fi ltration devices for lowincome communities on the US -Mexico border. Unpublished manuscript, Texas A&amp;M University, Department of Geography, College Station, TX.
- Varsanyi, M., P. Lewis, M. Provine, and S. Decker. 2012. A multilayered jurisdictional patchwork: Immigration federalism in the United States. Lawand Policy 34(2): 138 -58.
- Ward, P. 1999. Colonias and public policy in Texas and Mexico. Austin: The University of Texas Press.
- Wescoat, J. L., Jr., L. Headington, and R. Theobald, R. 2008. Water and poverty in the United States. Geoforum 38 (5): 801 -14.
- White, K., V. Yeager, N. Menachemi, and I. Scarinci. 2014. Impact of Alabama ' s immigration law on access to health care among Latina immigrants and children: Implications for national reform. American Journal of Public Health 104 (3): 397 -405.
- Wight, V., N. Kaushal, J. Waldfogel, and I. Gar fi nkel. 2014. Understanding the link between poverty and food insecurity among children: Does the de fi nition of poverty matter? Journal of Children and Poverty 20 (1): 1 -20.
- Wolf, A. T. 2011. Water and human security. Journal of Contemporary Water Research and Education 118 (1): 5.
- Wutich, A., and K. Ragsdale. 2008. Water insecurity and emotional distress: Coping with supply, access, and seasonal variability of water in a Bolivian squatter settlement. Social Science &amp; Medicine 67 (12): 2116 -25.

WENDY JEPSON is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, TX 77845. E-mail: wjepson@tamu.edu. Her research interests include water governance, political ecology, and environmental justice with an empirical focus on Mexican-American communities on the U.S. -Mexico border.

EMILY VANDEWALLE is a former graduate student in the Department of Geography at Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, TX 77845. E-mail: emily.vandewalle@gmail.com. Her research interests include water governance, public health, and environmental justice.