

    

## PLACE INVADERS: CONSTRUCTING THE NOMADIC THREAT IN ENGLAND*

## PETER KABACHNIK

abstract. Over the centuries, the image of nomads threatening sedentary ways of life has been a common pejorative representation. In order to understand what geographies underpin narratives about nomads, I examine how social theory and media representations invoke the image of nomads. Both media and academic representations are buttressed by limited understandings of place and space, framing nomads as the quintessential 'place invaders.' Focusing on nomadic Gypsies and Travelers in England provides a contemporary example of this process. British media representations construct nomadic Gypsies and Travelers in England as out-of-place and threatening. Deconstructing essentialist geographical conceptions allows us to avoid reproducing the common image of placeless nomads, reveals how people utilize place to render others inferior, and highlights the fact that conflicts between nomadic and sedentary ways of life are not intractable and natural. Adopting a more nuanced understanding of place can challenge the dominant trope of nomads as place invaders. Keywords: England, Gypsies and Travelers, media representations, nomads, place.

M any commentators celebrate the claim that we live in an era epitomized by mobility, yet certain mobile people still elicit negative reactions, including exclusion, stigmatization, and violence. Despite calls of the increasing irrelevance of state borders, awareness and defense of boundaries (at various scales) have in many ways been heightened. This is evident in the building of fences along the U.S.-Mexico border, the fear of terrorists and corresponding color-coded alerts, moral panics over the homeless, and anti-immigration rhetoric, to name but a few examples from the United States. What do disparate groups such as nomads, refugees, the homeless, internally displaced persons, and economic migrants have in common? For the purposes of this article, I highlight the fact that negative patterns of speech, pernicious stereotypical representations, and threatening images portray these groups as 'place invaders.' Thus politicians, journalists, and others who feel threatened decontextualize the practices of all these groups and individuals, abstracting their various forms of mobility and constructing it as threatening.

I  use  the  phrase 'place invader' to describe representations of individuals or groups whom people see as inherently threatening and anxiety arousing, precisely because they enter the 'wrong' place. Those who wish to exclude others invoke certain conceptions of place in a manner that facilitates the discourse of invasion. These geographical conceptions rely on essentialist conceptions that represent places

*This article derives from my dissertation, completed in  in the Department of Geography at the University of California-Los Angeles. I would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and Craig Colten for his careful reading and guidance throughout the revision process. I would also like to thank Michael Curry, Nick Howe, and Claudia Brazzale for their comments on earlier versions of this article. The usual disclaimer applies.

/ornament11 Dr. Kabachnik is  an  assistant  professor  of  geography  at  the  College  of  Staten  Island,  Staten Island, New York .

as isolated, static, and natural, with fixed boundaries. Thus, if people understand place in this way, mobility becomes invasive and an unwanted incursion because of the changes that will happen to the place. We can witness the 'place-invader' label applied repeatedly to those who are seen as transgressing the naturalized boundaries of place, those who are seen as out of place (Cresswell  ). They disrupt the taken-for-granted perspectives of place, space, and mobility. Geographers have offered alternative understandings of place which show that place and mobility need not be seen as incongruous. Doreen Massey referred to this antiessentialist conception of place as the 'progressive sense of place' (  ). A progressive sense of place conceptualizes places as constructed, dynamic, relational, and interconnected with other places.

In this article I focus on the situation of nomadic Gypsies and Travelers in England in order to exemplify the persistent pejorative meanings assigned to nomads. 1 That the nature of nomadic/sedentary relationships is inherently conflictual is easy to conclude from such persistent antipathy. The conflict is constructed, not inevitable, for it ignores periods of positive cooperation, tolerance, and peace between nomadic and sedentary communities. Social theorists often reproduce this antagonism, and the British press seizes upon, perpetuates, and sensationalizes it as well. The estimated  ,  - ,  nomadic Gypsies and Travelers are depicted as belligerent, combative, and threatening invaders (Niner  ; Kenrick  ).

Geographers have written a significant amount about Gypsies (Sibley  ,  ,  ; Nemeth  ,  ; Halfacree  a; Holloway  ,  ; Vanderbeck  ,  ), Irish Travelers (Kearns  ; MacLaughlin  ,  ,  ,  a,  b), and New Travelers (Halfacree  ,  b; Hetherington  ). Although media representations play a crucial role in many of these analyses (see, for example, Halfacree  ; Sibley  ; Hetherington  ; Holloway  ; Kabachnik  ), only Robert Vanderbeck and Sarah Holloway examine contemporary British media discourses in great detail (Vanderbeck  ; Holloway  ). Their articles explore the intricacies of a single media event, whereas I explore more general images and patterns that appear and reappear, covering many incidents that deal with conflict over trailerpark locations. I seek to connect these media representations with various conceptual debates that center on space, place, and mobility, helping to illustrate how geographical imaginations construct and reproduce our understandings of identity and difference. In particular, I highlight the conceptions of place on which the media rely.

Examining the role of the media is particularly important, because they are often the only way through which people 'interact' with Gypsies and Travelers (Sibley  ; Porter and Taylor  ). The media are a powerful influence on the representation and treatment of Gypsies and Travelers (Hancock  ; Vanderbeck  ; Morris  ),  for  biased  coverage exacerbates tension and negative perceptions. They repeatedly focus on negative images and stories, turning Gypsies and Travelers  into  scapegoats  and  perpetuating  stereotypes  (Acton  ;  Hancock  ; Hetherington  ). 2

The data I utilize come from local newspapers published in Great Britain between May  and February  . 3  Though by no means exhaustive, the sources I cite capture the general pattern of representations of Gypsy and Traveler issues in that fifty-seven-month period of news coverage. Unlike Holloway (  ), who found distinct regional differences in media representations of Gypsies and Travelers in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and David Sibley (  ), who noted that the perceived threat of Gypsies and Travelers varied from place to place, I found similar forms of negative reporting.

Furthermore, although examples of media representation containing neutral or positive images of Gypsies and Travelers exist, they are relatively scarce and more likely to be found in national newspapers. National newspapers do provide positive coverage of trailer-park cases, highlighted instances of cooperation and tolerance, and documented racism and discrimination. Most local media accounts of Gypsies and Travelers, in contrast, clearly contain sensationalized and hostile representations. As I will make clear, 'deviancy amplification' of Gypsies and Travelers is a central function of local and regional newspapers in Great Britain (Sibley  ,  ).

Many people may be surprised that, although nomadic groups no longer pose a military threat to states, the narratives that surround nomads today continue to reproduce that same discourse. Government policy and local communities still wage battles and build walls, and nomads remain a threat. Two very different arenas  local British media representations and academic social theoretical writing  still reproduce uncannily similar meanings of nomads as inherently incompatible with sedentary people. Is conflict between the nomadic and the sedentary natural? If we examine representations of nomads in various contexts, the answer would seem to be yes. Repeated associations of nomads with war, invasion, and resistance suggest that antagonism is the natural state of affairs between these two groups.

We must examine, rather than take for granted, how people construct nomadism as backward and inferior and identify unequal power relationships, both of which create the circumstances and obstacles that lead to conflict. First, I provide an overview of the context in England and examine the positive and negative meanings ascribed to nomads in social theory, where metaphoric discussions of nomads predominate. The conflicts are not inevitable, and geographical imaginations play a vital  role  in  making these discourses both possible and seemingly natural. Geographical conceptions perform an important function in the framing of the conflicts. I explore these ideas closely in the next section, where I examine the dominant trope in the British media about nomadic people, that of nomads as the quintessential place invaders. Invoking 'invasion' or 'invader' reveals the essentialist conception of reliance on place. By closely examining the media discourse in England over illegal caravan sites (trailer parks), we can begin to see the production and reproduction of the place-invader narrative. Finally, I offer examples of how an essentialist  conception of place is constructed in local British newspapers, which reinforce ideas that these place invaders will be place changers. I focus on three themes that represent Gypsies and Travelers as bringing about negative changes in

their communities, be they aesthetic, economic, or social. Deconstructing conceptions such as 'place' and 'nomadism' highlights the narrow and limited constructions of nomads.

## Gypsies and Travelers in England and the Sedentary-Nomad Antipathy

In England, Gypsies and Travelers must not only face the symbolic or epistemic violence of academics and journalists but also deal daily with townspeople, government officials, and police officers who discriminate against them and deny them access to places that provide the basic needs of human life, such as health care, education, employment, safety, and a home (Vanderbeck  ; Clark and Greenfields  ).

Harassment of nomads and lack of legal places are not merely inconvenient; they may lead to state-sponsored violence against them. In fact, many injuries and much property damage occur in the numerous evictions of Gypsies and Travelers from 'illegal' caravan sites. Perhaps the most notorious and large-scale confrontation between nomads and the state in recent history was the police attempt, Operation Solstice, to prevent a convoy of New Travelers from staging a festival near Stonehenge in  , in what is now known as the 'Battle of the Beanfield.'

The previous year, police had estimated that  ,  people attended an illegal festival at Stonehenge. To avoid such a gathering in  , the police created a buffer zone around the site to prevent the vehicles from entering. They funneled everyone onto minor roads and began to arrest people for trespassing and disorderly conduct. In order to escape arrest and damage to their vehicles, many New Travelers in the convoy drove through hedges and fences onto an adjacent field, from which the standoff gets its name. The incident lasted a few hours, until the police finally arrested more than  people in the largest civil arrest in British history. In the end, many vehicles were damaged and many people injured, and outside observers expressed shock at the force the police used (Morris, Morris, and Goodwin  ; Hetherington  ). This confrontation prompted the creation of the  Public Order Act, section  of  which is referred to as the 'hippy clause' (Kenrick and Clark  ,  ).  Eventually, in  ,  Parliament passed the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act, repealing the  Caravan Sites Act that included a (rarely followed) statement obliging local authorities to provide caravan sites to nomadic peoples. The repeal of the duty to provide caravan sites, along with an acknowledged shortfall of legal caravan sites, criminalized tens of thousands of Gypsies and Travelers, for they had no legal place to live. This has fueled continuing conflicts over the illegal status of many caravan sites.

Simply reducing the history of Gypsies and Travelers in Europe to one of murder, persecution, and discrimination is dangerous, however, because it perpetuates their representation as victims. That being said, the contemporary harassment in the United Kingdom, as described above, is nothing new for nomadic groups; various types of exclusion and punishment have persisted for centuries. 4

Historically, the sedentary world has responded to nomads in three dominant ways. First, writers describe nomads as possessing a harmonious and symbiotic relationship with their natural environments, for they take advantage of their local knowledge to search for seasonal pastures. In the second perspective, on the other hand, nomads inspire fascination and romanticism. The third reaction, which I will now explore further, is to feel threatened by nomads. Nomads, so the usual story goes, travel from place to place, rootless and barbaric, attacking and looting cities, raiding villages, and leaving chaos in their wake. Nomads are placeless, out to destroy their antithesis, the places of sedentary people. They are the ultimate, and perpetual, place invaders. 5  The Old Testament and the story of Cain and Abel commonly provide further justification for this long-standing incompatibility (Guenon  ; Chatwin  ; McVeigh  ; Brody  ; Cowan  ; Home  ). Abel's murder symbolically defeats nomadism, and God (in Judeo-Christian theology) favors the sedentary perspective, condemning both Cain and the Israelites to wander as a punishment for their sins. In Genesis  :  , Cain responds to his sentence by saying, 'My punishment is greater than I can bear.' Examination of the issue in the twenty-first century reveals that, in many cases, attitudes have barely changed. Portrayals of the two ways of life depict a constant struggle in which they are diametrically opposed to one another. Thus the nomadic way of life contrasts with the sedentary way of life, fostering an intrinsically antagonistic and conflictual relationship.

Few sustained attempts have been made to understand the relationship between sedentary and nomadic ways of life. Ibn Khaldun ([  ]  ), Rene Guenon (  ), Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari (  ,  ), Hugh Brody (  ), and Vilem Flusser (  )  all approached this topic from multiple perspectives and with various intentions. Even in these few efforts, the tensions between nomads and settled people normally remain unexplored, and this is true in other contexts too. When the topic is  broached, either in the media or in academia, the presumed antagonistic relationship is typically not problematized.

Some writers do advocate stopping discrimination against nomads and believe that the situation can change for the better. Nonetheless, we sense that the nature of nomads creates an inevitably conflictual relationship with the sedentary world. As David Mayall noted, 'The persistence of the problem is rooted in the incompatibility between the traveling and settled ways of life' (  ,  ). This presumed incompatibility is taken for granted and needs to be challenged, for it ignores variations in the ways in which nomads and sedentary people have interacted in different times and places.

## The Metaphorical Nomad

Our contemporary period is commonly described as an 'age of mobility,' and 'words associated with mobility are unremittingly positive' (Cresswell  ,  ). Furthermore, since the mid- s 'mobility,' 'traveling,' and 'nomadism' have become fashionable terms in fields such as social theory, cultural anthropology, feminist studies, and human geography, and scholars generally give these terms

positive connotations. Although this connotation can seem to be pervasive, portraying the contemporary world as simply viewing mobility positively is misleading.  Many  examples  throughout  the  world  belie  this  sentiment. As  various nation-states attempt to fortify their borders, many cases of xenophobia and violence have developed, and anxiety continually recurs over refugees and immigrants. Depending on the type of mobility, who is involved, and where it takes place, the meaning of mobility can vary dramatically. When academics appropriate and romanticize nomads, they are ignoring the experiences and practices of those who actually live that way of life.

Tim Cresswell provides an overview of various approaches to mobility. In his view, ideas about mobility are contingent on whether we adopt a sedentarist metaphysics or a nomadic metaphysics (  ). 6 According to Lisa Malkki, a universal model of identity rooted in specific fixed territories underpins a sedentarist metaphysics (  ). Similarly, Robbie McVeigh used the term 'sedentarism' to describe both the process of seeing nomads as inferior and the unquestioned privileging of fixed abodes (  ). People must belong to a specific place, exemplifying an essentialist conception of place. Thus nomads, and others without a fixed place, are particularly  terrifying  and  disruptive. A nomadic metaphysics, on the other hand, romanticizes movement while representing place pejoratively; flux and routes are the standard. This has become predominantly associated with developments in social theory, cultural theory, and anthropology. 7

Ideas of place-bound forms of identity need to be challenged. A nomadic metaphysics does this, but it also tends to ignore the fact that identity is still place based, regardless of all the supposed flux and increased mobilities of the contemporary period. By critiquing one perspective of place and then ignoring place altogether, a nomadic metaphysics is throwing out the baby with the bathwater.

In the modernist view of nomads, Cresswell examines the work of T. S. Eliot (  ), Richard Hoggart (  ), and Raymond Williams (  ,  ), showing how they used metaphors of mobility to suggest threat and disruption (Cresswell  ). For the modernist imagination, nomads were threatening, for they upset the certainties of essentialist conceptions of place, region, and culture. Even in a sensitive ethnographic portrait of nomadic ways of life, the view of mobility remained negative. In The Other Side of Eden (  ), Hugh Brody detailed his interactions with several nomadic Native American groups in Canada. He clearly approached the nomadic groups favorably. Yet, in an intriguing twist, Brody asserted that huntergatherers stay in one place and that sedentary farmers are the truly placeless. His work showed the importance of place for nomads but castigated the sedentary way of life by reversing the hierarchy. Equating the farmer with mobility retained the pejorative sense of mobility.

Postmodernists also utilized the traveling metaphor and nomadic metaphor in the late twentieth century (Cresswell  ; Sui  ). Cresswell, in what he termed the 'postmodern perspective on nomads,' seeks to understand the 'romanticization of the nomad as the geographical metaphor par excellence of postmodernity'

(  ,  ). In particular, in the work of Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari and of Michel de Certeau we find that nomads transgress order and spatial boundaries, symbolizing resistance (de Certeau  ;  Deleuze and Guattari  ).  Thus, once again antagonism between the two ways of life is inherent.

However, as Cresswell pointed out, this use of the term appropriates the nomads' experience, romanticizes it, and decontextualizes it, just as modernist uses did, although the postmodern version acts as an antipode to the modern one. Within the modernist imagination nomads signified a harrowing set of disruptions that signaled change and opposition that needed to be stopped. The postmodernist reaction was the reverse: Postmodernists welcomed such developments (Cresswell  ,  ).  As Cresswell concluded, we cannot simply overgeneralize nomads to mean, as do both modernist and postmodernist uses of the idea of nomads, 'either a generalized threat to civilization or generalized heroic figures resisting confines of a disciplinary society' (p.  ). Decontextualizing mobility will continue this generalizing trend; thus the need to provide situated and provisional accounts of movement (p.  ). As Neil Smith and Cindi Katz, as well as Geraldine Pratt, argued, the proliferation of spatial metaphors in academic discourse should not be welcomed uncritically (Smith and Katz  ; Pratt  ). Following Pratt's suggestion, we need to 'recognize the limits of any metaphor and resist being seduced by geographical and spatial metaphors that are ultimately aspatial and insensitive to place' (  ,  - ).

Yet the majority of material about nomads in social theory is metaphorical. To quickly revisit the modern and postmodern perspectives, we can clearly witness that the former viewed nomads negatively and that the latter celebrated them. Eliot, from the modernist vantage point, valued the essentialist notion of place, which was intertwined with the suspicion and denial of nomads. Deleuze and Guattari inverted the hierarchy, representing nomads as the ideal to be aspired to and celebrating the opportunities for resistance that mobility brings. However, they were equally passionate about what they wanted to dismantle and challenge; and the static, bounded place was a central concern that nomads are capable of subverting. Thus it becomes difficult to untangle how mobility is seen from how place is understood. Despite these major differences in perspective, the geographies are the remarkably similar. Indeed, the geographical conceptions of each  that is, the ways in which place and space are understood  are virtually identical.

For nomads, when viewed abstractly, places are simple points on a map and have no importance or character of their own. Only stasis allows us to participate and appreciate place. When moving, the places we pass through are just as insignificant as the dots on a grid. However, places are just as important for nomads, even though they may not stay in a single place for an extended period of time the way sedentarists do. But we must be careful not to ignore the mobility of sedentary ways of life as well (see Flusser  ); and we must acknowledge the vast variety of nomadic practices (Mayall  ; Niner  ). Ethnographies typically capture the variety and details of nomadic ways of life by highlighting nuances and not relying on

metaphors. Some nomads travel year-round, others winter in one area (sometimes again and again), others move occasionally. Mobility is not the only component of nomadic ways of life, either: For many nomads, living in a mobile home and just having the ability to move is enough to shape their identity as nonsedentary. Again, understanding the role of place in nomadism and the importance of places for nomads is critical.

In Great Britain, the lack of caravan sites, both permanent and transit, is precisely about the lack of places to facilitate a nomadic way of life. Memories, experiences, and associations of destinations infuse nomadic patterns, traveling routes, and decisions about where to go to next. Choosing traditional travel routes depend on the connections  social, employment, and family  that a particular group has with its destination. Without places to park a caravan, whether for a day, for the winter, or for a few years, nomadism could not exist. This makes clear the vital role that place plays within nomadism.

Negative images of nomads prevail in England. Granted, some positive, though stereotypical, representations portray Gypsies as the romantic wanderers that epitomize freedom. But this type of talk has diminished since the early  s,  except when some people comment on how they regret the loss of the romantic Gypsies and their colorful, horse-drawn wagons. This standard model of the metaphorical nomad as naturally antagonistic to the sedentary world parallels the representations found in British media discourse. It also helps to normalize the conflicts that occur throughout England. The same essentialist conceptions of place are being utilized as well.

## Representing Gypsies and Travelers and Their Attempts to Attain Legal Caravan Sites

An article from The Guardian captures the dominant way in which the British press represented Gypsies and Travelers: 'The terminology used in reporting stories about gypsies and travellers is often conflictual and derogatory to both travellers and their supporters. When gypsies arrive anywhere in numbers, they 'invade.' A proposal for a new caravan site sees local residents 'battle' to stop it. If they succeed, they score a 'victory. '  It  is  the  language  used  about  enemies' (Turner  ).  As  David Mayall suggests, 'recent news reporting has called for an early-warning system, evoking a warlike state of siege, to tackle the gypsy problem and beat the gypsy invasion' (  ,  ).  Here the term 'early-warning system,' usually reserved for tsunamis, hurricanes, and nuclear-missile attacks, reinforces the sense that Gypsies and Travelers are unwanted threats to the local community.

The British media adopt this war imagery when discussing relationships between nomadic Gypsies and Travelers and the sedentary English. The Sun is adept at utilizing such invectives. This includes declaring war on nomads, with such headlines as 'Sun War on Gipsy Free-for-All' and articles like 'Stamp on the Camps,' referring to Gypsy and Traveler caravan sites (Phillips  ;  Sun  ).  Here the newspaper states that it is launching its own campaign to stop what it sees as prefer-

ential treatment given to Gypsies and Travelers and encourages readers to provide negative information when a reporter says, 'Tell us your gipsy stories' (Phillips  ). Even suicide bombers make an appearance. While expressing her frustration that  she  would  be  unable  to 'get  rid  of  the  bastards'  meaning Gypsies and Travelers  a local councilperson divulges what she would do to the local caravan site: 'If I had cancer, I'd strap a big bomb around myself and go in tomorrow' ( dm  ).

Furthermore, articles depict Gypsies and Travelers as 'mobs' that go on a 'rampage' (Pyatt  ;  Coles  ). They do not visit, pass through, or move in; they 'march' as they 'invade,' 'swamp,' 'stump,' 'descend,' 'muscle  in,'  cause 'havoc,' and 'overrun' towns (Sapsted  ; Askill  ; Western Daily Press, cited in bcc  ; be  a,  b; Greenhill  ; pt  ; Y ates  ). Village peace 'shatters' as the 'outraged' residents live in 'misery' (Arkell  ;  Hoyle  ; hbm  ; Syson  ). After their arrival, 'once-peaceful' villages become 'horrifying,' 'bloodbaths,' and 'battlefields' ( pt  ;  Moult, Troup, and Darvill  ; Gazette  ; Scott  ).  'Battles' are won or lost on both sides ( bbc  ; Casciani  ;  Savill  ). Gypsies and Travelers consistently hold villagers under 'siege,' and villagers fear 'raids' and have to 'surrender' ( Weston-super-Mare Daily Post, cited in Morris  ,  ; cen  ; dm  ). People declare that they have 'stood up' to the Gypsies and participate in 'trench warfare' against them ( pt  ; MacAdam  ). In turn, Gypsies and Travelers operate 'with military precision' and use 'threatening behavior' against the townspeople ( sa  ; Hoyle  ).

With such belligerent invocations, that many local townspeople feel threatened and predominantly associate Gypsies and Travelers with conflict is not surprising. One particular image is used again and again. This is what I now examine: nomads as  invaders  the dominant, and perhaps most revealing, trope used to represent Gypsies and Travelers in the contemporary British media. Constructing Others as place invaders, following Holloway, can 'produce highly spatialised understandings of difference' (  ,  ), in which people wish for those who are 'different' to remain distant.

## Place Invaders

On  October  the banner headline of the Daily Mail read: 'On the Dover Run with the Gypsy Invasion.' Although such representations might be expected in newspapers like the Daily Mail or tabloids such as The Sun, more 'serious' newspapers are not immune to such imagery. Indeed, The Independent ran an article under the headline 'Gypsies Invade Dover, Hoping for a Handout' (  ).  This  particular  moral panic centered on the sudden arrival in Great Britain of (sedentary) Roma from east-central Europe, many of whom were fleeing racist hostility in the Czech Republic and Slovakia and seeking political asylum. 8 After a short period of increased applications by Roma and the corresponding media attention, both died down.

However, this was not the first time or the last time that the media described groups in England in such terms. The above example fosters an image of Great Britain as a clearly demarcated place with fixed borders. Refugees are foreign and

pose a threat to the integrity of both the state and the national identity. The majority of people clearly see them as not belonging. We may question the use of the term 'invade' as being inflammatory and xenophobic, but within the logic of the nation-state system, which continues to be a dominant element of the modern geopolitical imagination, constructing immigrants and refugees  foreigners  as belonging someplace else is consistent. However, people apply this out-of-place status to internal Others as well as external Others.

Nomadic Gypsies and Travelers often occupy this role in England. Townspeople and the media focus on their nomadism, and the meanings associated with that way of life, not on their arrival from another country. The image of invasion remains the same, and, although the scale has changed, national identity still certainly plays an important role. In these instances, however, local communities resist Gypsies and Travelers from entering their towns even though most are, in fact, British citizens. 9

Countless articles and individual commentaries depict those who live a traveling way of life as invaders: 'Safety Fear as Gypsies Invade' ( sa  ), 'Travellers Invade Village' (Arkell  ), 'Gypsies Invade Village Site' ( scg  ), 'Gypsies Invade Us for the Third Time This Season' ( nthc  ) 'Travellers Invade Depot Near Beauty Spot' ( pt  ), 'Traveller Invasion' ( wdp  ), and so on. Invasion connotes something unwanted and harmful. Invaders are enemies. And invaders must be expelled, which corresponds to processes of abjection, or the urge to remove disorder (Sibley  ).

These moral panics reveal that media representations construct Gypsies and Travelers as a threat to the established order (Sibley  ). How justified is this threat? Although we can certainly feel threatened even when no reason for fear exists, concerned residents repeatedly exaggerate the presence of Gypsies and Travelers, as well as other marginalized groups. The perceived influx and invasion of Gypsies and Travelers rarely stem from dramatic increases in the population of nomads; their greater visibility is the cause (Sibley  ). We can see proof of this both in the past and in other places. In Scotland in  , local newspapers quickly transformed the arrival of a group of  Gypsies into an 'invasion' of more than  (Sibley  ,  ). And when another group of nomadic Gypsies traveled back and forth between the Netherlands, Belgium, and France in the early twentieth century, the local press interpreted each new border crossing as another Gypsy invasion (Lucassen  ). That the same individuals were returning each time, traveling a cyclical route, went unrecognized. This process recurs today, as communities in England label certain local Gypsy and Traveler groups as 'invaders.'

## Constructing Places in the Media

What does this emphasis on invasion tell us about geography? As Massey suggested, bounded, essentialist conceptions of place invite ideas of invasion (  ,  ). Residents hope to exclude invaders for a wide array of reasons, ranging from economic and environmental concerns, to anger over illegal sites and fear of crime. A com-

mon refrain is that townspeople do not want their towns to change. Residents of the towns that suffer these 'invasions' envision having static and rigid boundaries, not permeable ones. Thus an essentialist conception of place underpins the discourse of invasion and turns Gypsies and Travelers into place invaders. Three dominant tropes in the local media coverage of Gypsies and Travelers in Great Britain serve to justify exclusion: aesthetics, economics, and antisocial behavior. All three show how place is being conceptualized and invoked in an essentialist manner.

First,  the  focus  on  aesthetics comes up repeatedly in the media. Spoiling the landscape, damaging the natural environment, and 'materially harm[ing] the rural area' are common refrains that serve to construct Gypsies and Travelers as out of place ( ge  a). One newspaper cited a report that was used in a case that denied Gypsies permission to stay. One of the primary justifications was that the 'gipsy camp detracted from the pleasant views across Bredon Hill, in the Cotswolds Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and was seriously detrimental to the character and appearance of the surrounding countryside' ( ge  b). We are told in another case, more explicitly, that 'Travelers would be tolerated on less sensitive areas such as waste ground away from busy roads and areas of housing' (Newble  ,  - ). This quotation reveals a concern with preventing the alteration of the dominant landscape aesthetic, into which Gypsies and Travelers do not fit.

The second trope focuses on economic concerns, specifically the idea that property values will plummet once Gypsies and Travelers move into the area. As a woman in North Wiltshire intimates: 'I have been living here for  years and been told to expect a  - percent drop in our house price' (McCaughey  ). Another person, frequenting a pub that has banned Travelers, was 'pretty peed off' and felt that his property had 'gone down in value from  ,  to  ,  [roughly from .. ,  to  ,  ]  because of the illegal caravan site' (Stuart  ).  This trope shows how both actual and perceived changes to the place are intimately bound up with material concerns. The arrival of Gypsies and Travelers will harm the community financially.

Third, recurrent fear exists not only that Gypsy and Traveler culture is incompatible with the local way of life but also that specific practices, such as criminal activity,  hostility,  disruption,  noise,  and messiness will accompany the arrival of Gypsies and Travelers. I group these types of representations and label them 'antisocial behavior.' One woman states: 'I'm not against gypsies, but it's very difficult to have sympathy with them when you look at the mess they cause' ( wdp  ). Images of messy caravan sites and accusations of litter and rubbish are typical, with townspeople blaming Gypsies and Travelers for 'soiling the streets' and leaving 'a terrible mess there' (Sun  ;  Y ates  ). Another woman adds: 'I have two young children and I am scared for them. When the travelers come into the village they swear openly at residents and drive around on quad bikes with no regard for other people's safety' ( wdp  ).

The criminal stereotype, common historically, is reproduced in contemporary media discourse by references to the illegal status of caravans sites and to planning

regulations being broken and 'flouted,' with 'flagrant breaches of planning rules' (Alderson and Lusher  ;  McCaughey  ). At times townspeople invoke the criminal stereotype even more explicitly: 'I won't be able to sleep at night because I will be worried about someone breaking in here' ( sa  ). People feel Gypsies and Travelers are threatening and hostile figures, causing local populations to 'live in fear' and feel 'intimidated' (Sapsted  ; be  ; Gazette  ; Sun  ). Here local villagers construct Gypsy and Traveler culture as deviant and antisocial, and their presence instills a sense of foreboding and nuisance.

To sum up, these three common tropes found in local media discourse legitimize the exclusion of Gypsies and Travelers by constructing places  specific towns and neighborhoods  as essentialist and under threat of dramatic, negative changes that will harm the value, aesthetics, or social fabric of the communities that Gypsies and Travelers attempt to live in. It is not simply that they are constructed as invaders but that their presence will change the place. Place invaders inevitably are place changers.

## Challenging the Idea of Invasion

From the perspective of most Westerners who have never been nomadic, various ways to respond to this mythic character exist. At one end of the spectrum, some will  wholeheartedly agree with the discourse and/or sympathize with local concerns. At the other extreme, many liberals may find this representation hostile, ignorant, racist, and, therefore, very troubling, especially in the twenty-first century. Disturbing as this exclusionary rhetoric may be, it still sounds familiar. What unites most reactions to the place-invader trope, regardless of whether we side with the locals,  the  nomads, or fall somewhere in between, is that, although people often question the positive or pejorative reactions to nomads, the idea of invasion goes unchallenged.

The lack of challenge is due mainly to the ways in which people envision and define places. When people utilize the place-invader trope they define places in an essentialist manner, as bounded and static entities. If that is the fundamental nature of places, then placeless Gypsies and Travelers will inevitably penetrate boundaries, leading to suspicion and anxiety over the nomads and the potential damage and change that the town or neighborhood will undergo.

The threat of 'invasion,' not the actual numbers of Gypsies and Travelers, is enough to compel people to feel threatened. Historically, numbers are regularly inflated to suggest an influx of Gypsies and Travelers to an area. Logically, the sedentarist system is rattled when confronted with the perceived anomaly of nomads; the possibility of nomads, not their numbers, is what proves so unsettling.

Of course, Gypsies and Travelers are not immune to replicating this conception of place. Many of them utilize the identical discourse to justify their ability to stay on their land, purporting an essentialist conception of their own caravan site and home. And several times during my fieldwork Gypsies and Travelers Othered the Muslim community. According to three of my respondents, Muslims, unlike themselves, were given special treatment despite being outsiders. For these respondents,

practices of exclusion and deeming others 'place invaders' was not a wholly invalid strategy; they simply believed that Gypsies and Travelers were not appropriate targets of such measures and discourses.

Although national newspapers occasionally publish articles that directly challenge the place-invader image found in local media discourses, the greater number of sensationalized representations in the local and tabloid press are far more easily noticed. These more nuanced representations draw attention to the limited perspectives of local newspapers that ignore the complexity of the caravan-site issue in Britain, overlook cases of tolerance and cooperation, and deny the people's ambiguous feelings.

How the local media portray Gypsies and Travelers and how people treat them on a daily basis reflect the hegemony of the sedentary way of life. We clearly need to deconstruct this dichotomy in order to begin to alter the power dynamic between nomads and settled people. If we do not alter the dynamic, reproduction of the nomad-sedentary binary will continue, and sedentarist metaphysics  the idea of a natural order in which certain groups of people belong in certain places (Malkki  )  will  dominate. The sedentarist metaphysics proves to be the deepest and most critical facet of the prejudice, exclusion, and discrimination that nomads face. The subsequent impulse of fixing people to specific, rooted territories, as exemplified by the 'territorial trap' that underpins the entire nation-state system (Agnew  ), not only utilizes powerful and basic geographical conceptions but also proves damaging to those seen as outside the sedentarist system.

The idea of nomads as place invaders informs us not only about how we imagine and value mobility but also about our attitudes toward and understandings of place. Regardless of the connotation applied to mobility, or whether we utilize a sedentarist metaphysics or a nomadic one, people rely on an essentialist conception of place. In the modernist or sedentarist logic, nomads  be they capitalists, refugees, or migrant workers  threaten the stability of places by crossing borders and disrupting the normative order. In the postmodern perspective, or among people who utilize a nomadic metaphysics, nomads become resistance par excellence, for they can avoid the confining and ordering qualities of place. Place is reduced to a traditional, reactionary organ of state control.

As I have suggested, the idea of nomads as place invaders is not limited to Gypsies and Travelers in England but is a dominant theme in the Western world. The idea that nomads are a threat to the sedentary world has a long and persistent history. Journalists, writers, and academics readily represent both metaphorical and actual nomads as warlike invaders, always moving, and having no place of their own (although alternative representations do exist). Utilization of essentialist conceptions of place actively enables the stigmatization of nomads as seemingly perpetual place invaders.

The issue of how nomads are thought of has a significance that extends beyond the rights of Gypsies and Travelers. Nomads not only rattle the norms of the sedentary system, much as migrants and refugees do, but also create an even further chal-

lenge to the very logic of that system. Whereas migrant and refugee place invaders have a place from which they came and to which they can be sent back, nomads give a peculiar jolt to the sedentarist system. Where do we send an individual or a group constructed over centuries as not having a place of their own? Answering this question is the ultimate challenge to sedentarist metaphysics, disrupting the pervasive conflation of place, culture, and identity (Lewis  ;  Gupta and Ferguson  ; Dirlik  ; Inda and Rosaldo  ).

Decontextualized, abstract, and universal models of place and nomadism reinforce one another. Regardless of whether place or mobility is held in high regard, the other is instantly made suspect and denigrated. As I have shown, geographical conceptions can support certain representations of nomads and thereby make it seem as though conflicts are inevitable and natural. Adopting a more nuanced, or progressive, understanding of place will enable us to begin to deconstruct the nomadic invader trope that appears in multiple contexts and media (Massey  ). Acknowledging that place and mobility are intertwined, rather than mutually exclusive, will also aid in preventing the simplification and sensationalization of nomadic ways of life. Paying close attention to nomads' actual practices (with their various place-making strategies), rather than generalizing and abstracting all nomads, can begin to counter bounded and exclusionary conceptions of place.

People inscribe and reproduce order and hierarchy in places. The case of nomadic Gypsies and Travelers in England illustrates this. Without a reconsideration of the nature of places and the ways in which people construct places, along with the deconstruction of essentialist conceptions of place and nomadism, nomads in England will remain assigned to an inferior status when compared with the hegemonic sedentary norm.

## Notes

-  . The main groups that this umbrella term includes are 'British Gypsies,' ' Irish Travelers,' and 'New Travelers.' Although 'Roma' is the preferred designation for many, because 'Gypsy' is seen as derogatory, in Great Britain they self-identify as 'Gypsy.'
-  . For an analysis of how representations in encyclopedias reinforce stereotypes, see Willems and Lucassen  .
-  . This research was part of my dissertation fieldwork (January-March  and  SeptemberDecember  ), which included interviews with Gypsies, Travelers, and activists.
-  . For historical accounts of their treatment in Europe, see Crowe  ;  Fraser  ;  Hancock  ; Lucassen, Willems, and Cottaar  ; for their treatment in Great Britain, see Mayall  .
-  . These last two tropes of romanticism and threat are also identified in academic discourses that examine Gypsies and Travelers (see Lucassen, Willems, and Cottaar  ).
-  . Cresswell does acknowledge the simplifying nature of his delineation, stating that the two vantage points 'form ends of a continuum and rarely exist in pure form' (  ,  ).
-  . In the  s roots began to be viewed as suspect. This can be seen in anthropology with Clifford's  shift to routes and in philosophy/social theory with Deleuze and Guattari's rhizomatics, which sought to avoid the modernist pitfalls of arborescent, or rooted, thought (  ).  Because place was predominantly associated with roots and stability, place became suspect as well.
-  . For an in-depth analysis of the British media discourse on this issue, see Clark and Campbell  .

-  . However, even the fact that Gypsies and Travelers have been living in a town does not prevent accusations of invasion from being levied at them (see Todd and Clark  ). The exception are Irish Travelers: Many of them, once citizens of the Republic of Ireland, are now British citizens.

## References

- Acton, T.  . Gypsy Politics and Social Change: The Development of Ethnic Ideology and Pressure Politics among British Gypsies from Victorian Reformism to Romany Nationalism . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
- Agnew, J.  . Geopolitics: Re-Visioning World Politics . London: Routledge.
- Alderson, A., and A. Lusher.  . 'We Are Law-Abiding People' (Except for Planning Rules, of Course). Telegraph,  October. [www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/  /We-are-law-abidingpeople-except-for-planning-rules-of-course.html].
- Arkell,  H.  . Travellers  Invade Village. The Sun,  August.  [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Askill,  J.  . Travellers  Stump Village. The Sun,  April.  [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation].  . Gypsies Win Battle to Stay. BBC News,  January. [http://news.bbc.co.uk/  /hi/uk\_news/england/beds/bucks/herts/  .stm].
- BCC [Bristol City Council].  . Gypsies and Travellers: Frequently Asked Questions/Myths/ . . . and the Facts. [www.bristol.gov.uk/ccm/cms-service/stream/asset/?asset\_id=  ].
- BE [Burnley Express].  a. Call  for Action  over  Travellers. Burnley Express,  September. [www.burnleytoday.co.uk/ViewArticle  .aspx?SectionID=  &amp;ArticleID=  ].
- ---.  b. Residents' Fury over Travellers. Burnley Express,  September. [www.burnleytoday .co.uk/ViewArticle  .aspx?SectionID=  &amp;ArticleID=  ].
- Brody, H.  . The Other Side of Eden: Hunters, Farmers, and the Shaping of the World . New York: North Point Press.
- Casciani, D.  . The Battle for Gypsy Land. BBC News,  April. [http://news.bbc.co.uk/  /hi/k\_news /  .stm].
- CEN [Cambridge Evening News].  . Villagers in Council Siege. Cambridge Evening News,  September. Formerly at [www.cambridge-news.co.uk/news/ely/  /  /  /b  b  db  -f  - -bdc  - f  df  f  e  .lpf].
- Chatwin, B.  . What Am I Doing Here . New York: Viking Penguin.
- Clark, C., and E. Campbell.  . 'Gypsy Invasion': A Critical Analysis of Newspaper Reaction to Czech and Slovak Asylum-Seekers in Britain,  . Romani Studies  (  ):  - .
- Clark, C., and M. Greenfields.  . Here to Stay: The Gypsies and Travellers of Britain . Hatfield, England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- Clifford, J.  . The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Ethnography, Literature, and Art . London: Harvard University Press.
- Coles, J.  . Evicted Gipsies' Rampage. The Sun,  September. [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Cowan, G.  . Nomadology in Architecture: Ephemerality, Movement and Collaboration. M.Arch. thesis, University of Adelaide.
- Cresswell, T.  . In Place / Out of Place: Geography, Ideology, and Transgression . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- ---.  . Imagining the Nomad: Mobility and the Postmodern Primitive. In Space and Social Theory: Geographical Interpretations of Post-Modernity, edited by U. Strohmayer and G. Benko,  - . Oxford: Blackwell.
- ---.  . On the Move: Mobility in the Modern Western World . New York: Routledge.

Crowe, D.  . A History of the Gypsies of Eastern Europe and Russia . New York: St. Martin's Griffin. De Certeau, M.  . The Practice of Everyday Life . Berkeley: University of California Press.

- Deleuze, G., and F. Guattari.  . Nomadology: The War Machine . New York: Semiotext(e).
- ---.  . A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Dirlik, A.  . Place-Based Imagination: Globalism and the Politics of Place. Review: A Journal of the Fernand Braudel Center  (  ):  - .

- DM [Daily Mail].  . On the Dover Run with the Gypsy Invasion. [London] Daily Mail,  October,  .
- ---.  . Surrender to the Gipsies, Prescott Orders Town Halls. [London] Daily Mail,  March,  . ---.  . Councillors Re-Trained after Traveller Jibe. Mail Online,  January. [www.dailymail .co.uk/pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in\_article\_id=  &amp;in\_page\_id=  ].
- Eliot, T. S.  . Notes towards the Definition of Culture . New York: Harcourt, Brace.
- Flusser, V.  . The Freedom of the Migrant: Objections to Nationalism . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
- Fraser, A.  . The Gypsies . Oxford: Blackwell.
- Gazette.  . Fear over Traveller Sites. Essex Evening Gazette,  November. [http://archive.gazettenews .co.uk/  /  /  /  .html].
- GE [Gloucestershire Echo].  a. Caravans Can't Remain on Site. Gloucesterhire Echo,  October. Formerly at [www.thisisgloucestershire.co.uk/news/Caravans-Can't-Remain-Site/article- -detail/article.html].
- ---.  b. Gipsies Ordered to Pack Up and Leave. Gloucesterhire Echo,  November. Formerly at [www.thisisgloucestershire.co.uk/news/Gipsies-Ordered-Leave/article- -detail /article.html].
- Greenhill, S.  . March of the Gipsy Camps. Mail Online,  November. [www.dailymail.co.uk /pages/live/articles/news/news.html?in\_article\_id=  &amp;in\_page\_id=  ].
- Guenon, R.  . The Reign of Quantity and the Signs of the Times . London: Luzac.
- Gupta, A., and J. Ferguson.  . Beyond 'Culture': Space, Identity, and the Politics of Difference. In Culture, Power, Place, edited by A. Gupta and J. Ferguson,  - . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
- Halfacree, K.  . The New 'Folk-Devils': Travellers, the British State and the Rural Idyll. Swansea Geographer  :  - .
- ---.  a. The Distribution of Gypsy Caravans in England,  - . Geography  (  ):  - . ---.  b. Out of Place in the Country: Travellers and the 'Rural Idyll.' Antipode  (  ):  - . Hancock, I.  . The Pariah Syndrome . Ann Arbor, Mich.: Karoma Publishers.
- ---.  . Duty and Beauty, Possession and Truth: Lexical Impoverishment as Control. In Romani Culture and Gypsy Identity, edited by T. Acton and G. Mundy,  - . Hatfield, England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- ---.  . The Symbolic Function of the Gypsy Myth. In Race and Ideology: Language, Symbolism, and Popular Culture, edited  by A. Spears,  - .  Detroit, Mich.: Wayne State University Press.
- HBM [Hoddesdon and Broxbourne Mercury].  . Residents Fight Plans for  Gipsy Caravans. Mercury,  December. [www.hertfordshiremercury.co.uk/hertfordshiremercury-news/displayarticle .asp?id=  ].
- Hetherington, K.  . New Age Travellers: Vanloads of Uproarious Humanity. New York: Cassell.
- Hoggart, R.  . The Uses of Literacy: Aspects of Working Class Life with Special Reference to Publica-
- tions and Entertainments . London: Chatto and Windus.
- Holloway, S.  . Outsiders in Rural Society? Constructions of Rurality and Nature-Society Relations in the Racialisation of English Gypsy-Travellers,  - . Environment and Planning D: Society and Space  (  ):  - .

---.



.

Burning Issues: Whiteness, Rurality and the Politics of Difference.

Geoforum



(



):



-



.

- Home, R.  . Negotiating Security of Tenure for Peri-Urban Settlement: Traveller-Gypsies and the Planning System in the United Kingdom. Habitat International  (  ):  - .
- Hoyle, B.  . Gypsies' Instant Colony  'Shatters' Village Peace. The Times,  October. [www.timesonline .co.uk/tol/news/uk/article  .ece].
- Inda, J., and R. Rosaldo.  . Introduction: A World in Motion. In The Anthropology of Globalization: A Reader, edited by J. Inda and R. Rosaldo,  - . Malden, Mass.: Blackwell.
- Independent.  . Gypsies Invade Dover, Hoping for a Handout. The Independent [London],  October,  .
- Kabachnik, P.  . To Choose, Fix, or Ignore Culture? The Cultural Politics of Gypsy and Traveler Mobility in England. Social and Cultural Geography  (  ):  - .
- Kearns, K.  . Irish Tinkers: An Itinerant Population in Transition. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .

- Kenrick, D.  . The Romani World: A Historical Dictionary of the Gypsies . Hatfield, England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- Kenrick, D., and C. Clark.  . Moving On: The Gypsies and Travellers of Britain . Hatfield, England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- Khaldun, I. [  ]  . The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History .  T ranslated  by  F.  Rosenthal. Abridged and edited by N. J. Dawood. London: Routledge &amp; K. Paul.
- Lewis, M.  . Elusive Societies: A Regional-Cartographical Approach to the Study of Human Relatedness. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Lucassen, L.  . En men noemde hen zigeuners. De geschiedenis van Kaldarasch, Ursari, Lowara en Sinti in Nederland:  - (And They Called Them Gypsies. The History of Kaldarash, Ursari, Lowara and Sinti in the Netherlands:  - ). Amsterdam: Stichting Beheer IISG /SDU Uitgeverij.
- Lucassen, L., W. Willems, and A. Cottaar, eds.  . Gypsies and Other Itinerant Groups: A SocioHistorical Approach . New York: St. Martin's Press.
- MacAdam, H.  . I Stood Up to Gipsy Camp. The Sun,  October. [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- MacLaughlin, J.  . Travellers and Ireland: Whose Country, Whose History? Cork, Ireland: Cork University Press.
- ---.  . The Evolution of Anti-Traveller Racism in Ireland. Race and Class  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . The Political Geography of Anti-Traveller Racism in Ireland: The Politics of Exclusion and the Geography of Closure. Political Geography  (  ):  - .
- ---.  a. European Gypsies and the Historical Geography of Loathing. Review: A Journal of the Fernand Braudel Center  (  ):  - .
- ---.  b. Nation-Building, Social Closure and Anti-Traveller Racism in Ireland. Sociology: The Journal of the British Sociological Association  (  ):  - .
- Malkki, L.  . National Geographic: The Rooting of Peoples and the Territorialization of National Identity among Scholars and Refugees. In Culture, Power, Place, edited by A. Gupta and J. Ferguson,  - . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press.
- Massey, D.  . Power-Geometry and a Progressive Sense of Place. In Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change, edited by J. Bird, B. Curtis, T. Putnam, G. Robertson, and L. Tucker,  - . London: Routledge.
- Mayall, D.  . Gypsy-Travellers in Nineteenth Century Society . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
- ---.  . Gypsy Identities,  - : From Egyptians and Moon-Men to the Ethnic Romany . London: Routledge.
- McCaughey, R.  . Landmark Battle for Gypsies. Swindon Advertiser ,  January. [http://archive .wiltshiretimes .co.uk/  /  /  /  .html].
- McVeigh, R.  . Theorising Sedentarism: The Roots of Anti-Nomadism. In Gypsy Politics and Traveller Identity, edited by T. Acton,  - . Hatfield, England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- Morris, G., R. Morris, and N. Goodwin, dirs.  . Critical Eye: Operation Solstice. Produced by Maya Vision, Solstice Films. London: Channel  .
- Morris, R.  . Gypsies, Travellers and the Media: Press Regulation and Racism in the UK. Communications Law  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Nomads and Newspapers. In Here to Stay: The Gypsies and Travellers of Britain, edited  by  C.  Clark  and  M.  Greenfields,  - .  Hatfield,  England: University of Hertfordshire Press.
- Moult, J., J. Troup, and M. Darvill.  . Welcome to Gipsy City. The Sun,  March. [www.thesun.co.uk /article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Nemeth, D.  . A Case Study of Rom Gypsy Residential Mobility in the United States. Yearbook of the Association of Pacific Coast Geographers  :  - .
- ---.  . Gypsy-American: An Ethnogeography . Lewiston: Edwin Mellen.
- Newble, D.  . Surrender. Daily Echo [Southampton, England],  October,  - .
- Niner, P.  . The Provision and Condition of Local Authority Gypsy/Traveller Sites in England . London: University of Birmingham.
- ---.  . Local Authority Gypsy/Traveller Sites in England . London: ODPM / University of Birmingham.

- NTHC [Northampton Town Hockey Club].  . Gypsies Invade Us for the Third Time This Season. Northampton Town Hockey Club . Formerly at [http://ourworld.compuserve.com/homepages/ northampton\_town\_hockey\_club/News.htm].
- Phillips,  M.  . Stamp on the Camps. The Sun,  March.  [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Porter, M., and B. Taylor.  . Gypsies and Travellers. In The Equalities Review: Equalities in Great Britain,  - , edited by P. Thane, T. Evans, L. Filby, N. Kimber, and others,  - . London: University of London, Institute of Historical Research, Centre for Contemporary British History.
- Pratt, G.  . Spatial Metaphors and Speaking Positions. In Reading Human Geography: The Poetics and Politics of Inquiry, edited by T. Barnes and D. Gregory,  - . London: Arnold.
- PT [Portsmouth Today].  . Trench Warfare to Keep Out Travellers. Portsmouth Today,  September.  Formerly at [www.portsmouthtoday.co.uk/ViewArticle  .aspx?SectionID=  &amp;ArticleID =   ].
- ---.  . Travellers Invade Depot Near Beauty Spot. Portsmouth Today,  November. [www .portsmouthtoday.co.uk/ViewArticle  .aspx?SectionID=  &amp;ArticleID=  ].
- Pyatt, J.  . Gipsy Mob at Eton. The Sun,  May. [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- SA [Swindon Advertiser].  . Safety Fear as Gypsies Invade. Swindon Advertiser,  March. [http:// archive.thisiswiltshire.co.uk/  /  /  /  .html].
- Sapsted, D.  a. Gipsies Have 'Overrun' Fen Village. The Telegraph,  November. [www.telegraph .co.uk/news/uknews/  /Gipsies-have-overrun-fen-village.html].
- ---.  . Villagers Say They Live in Fear Since 'Invasion' of Travellers. The Telegraph,  July. [www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/  /Villagers-say-they-live-in-fear-since-invasion-of -travellers.html].
- Savill, R.  . Villagers Lose Gipsy Battle. The Telegraph,  February. [www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews /  /Villagers-lose-gipsy-battle.html].
- SCG [Somerset Country Gazette].  . Gypsies Invade Village Site. Somerset Country Gazette,  October. [http://archive.falmouthpacket.co.uk/  /  /  /  .html].
- Scott, J.  . Gipsy Camp Bloodbath. The Sun,  September. [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Sibley, D.  . Outsiders in Urban Society . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
- ---.  . Outsiders in Society and Space. In Inventing Places: Studies in Cultural Geography, edited by K. Anderson and F. Gale,  - . Melbourne, Australia: Longman Cheshire.
- ---.  . Geographies of Exclusion: Society and Difference in the West . London: Routledge.
- Smith, N., and C. Katz.  . Grounding Metaphor: Towards a Spatialized Politics. In Place and the Politics of Identity, edited by M. Keith and S. Pile,  - . London: Routledge.
- Stuart, J.  . Focus: 'Gypsies Are Going to Get Killed. If They Did This to Asians, There'd Be Riots All over England.' The Independent [London],  March. [http://news.independent.co.uk/uk/this \_britain/article  .ece].
- Sui, D.  . Visuality, Aurality, and the Shifting Metaphors in Geographic Thought in the Late  th Century. Annals of the Association of American Geographers  (  ):  - .
- Sun.  . Sun War on Gipsy Free-for-All. The Sun [London],  March,  .
- ---.  . Travellers 'Swamp' Village. The Sun,  August.  [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Syson, N.  . Gipsies: We'll Get Pads in Sun. The Sun,  November. [www.thesun.co.uk/article/  ,,  - ,  .html].
- Todd, D., and G. Clark.  . Gypsy Site Provision &amp; Policy: Research Report. Department of the Environment . London: HMSO.
- Turner, R.  . Fellow Travellers. The Guardian,  August.  [www.guardian.co.uk/racism/Story /  ,  ,  ,  .html].
- Vanderbeck, R.  . Youth, Racism and Place in the Tony Martin Affair. Antipode  (  ):  - .
- ---.  . Anti-Nomadism, Institutions, and the Geographies of Childhood. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space  (  ):  - .
- WDP [Western Daily Press].  . Invasion of the Gypsies. Western Daily Press [Bristol, England],  November,  .

- ---.  . Traveller Invasion. Western Daily Press [Bristol, England],  September. Formerly at [www.westpress.co.uk/displayNode.jsp?nodeId=  &amp;command=displayContent&amp;sourceNode =  &amp;contentPK=  &amp;moduleName=InternalSearch&amp;formname=sidebarsearch].
- Willems, W., an d L. Lucassen.  . The Church of Knowledge: Representations of Gypsies in Encyclopedias. In Gypsies and Other Itinerant Groups: A Socio-Historical Approach, edited by L. Lucassen, W. Willems, and A. Cottaar,  - . New York: St. Martin's Press.

Williams, R.  . Border Country. London: Chatto and Windus.

---.  . Resources of Hope: Culture, Democracy, Socialism. New York: Verso.

- Yates,  K.  . Travellers  Descend on Two Worcester Sites. Worcester News,  January.  [www .worcesternews.co.uk/mostpopular.var.  .mostviewed.travellers\_descend\_on\_two\_worcester \_sites.php].