<!-- image -->

## The Professional Geographer

ISSN: 0033-0124 (Print) 1467-9272 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rtpg20

## Dharavi in Beijing? A Hidden Geography of Waste and Migrant Exclusion

Guo Chen, Jia Feng &amp; Liwen Chen

To cite this article: Guo Chen, Jia Feng &amp; Liwen Chen (2023) Dharavi in Beijing? A Hidden Geography of Waste and Migrant Exclusion, The Professional Geographer, 75:1, 187-205, DOI: 10.1080/00330124.2022.2112965

To link to this article:

https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2022.2112965

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Published online: 11 Oct 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 718

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

曲

CrossMark

<!-- image -->

## FOCUS

## Dharavi in Beijing? A Hidden Geography of Waste and Migrant Exclusion

Guo Chen

<!-- image -->

Michigan State University, USA

Jia Feng

<!-- image -->

University of Nevada, Reno, USA

## Liwen Chen

Zero Waste Village, China

Waste-picking and informal recycling promote grassroots investment, providing employment, conserving resources, and protecting the environment. Six million people work in informal recycling across urban China. In particular, in Beijing in the 2010s, between 200,000 and 300,000 people -mostly migrants -worked in the waste sector. Following the publicity of being labeled a ' city besieged by garbage, ' Beijing ' s waste recycling has taken center stage in state and municipal campaigns, enterprise interests, and activism. In 2019 China promulgated a nationwide garbage sorting plan, ignoring an elaborate migrant-run recycling system and the lived experiences of those migrants since the 1980s. Drawing from a decadelong project on the Henancun villages within Beijing and on archival materials, this article reconstructs and brings to the foreground the hidden geography of Beijing ' s migrant recycling: its state-sanctioned germination, flourishing, and frequent expulsions. We examine the interface of state, municipal bureaucracies, urbanites, and scholars in shaping rhetoric, producing the boundary between formal and informal, and the structuration of flexible inclusion and constant exclusion of waste and migrant waste workers, resulting in disrupted historicity of migrant citizenship claims and community dislocations. China ' s hidden, shifting ' Dharavi ' features the enormous resilience of, and long-term exploitation and exclusion of, its migrants. Key Words: Beijing, China, hidden geography, informal waste recycling, rural -urban migrants.

The waste amount has been soaring, not declining. The incinerator has started to run in 2019. [The prior delay] was because it was under construction, not because of resistance.

-Waste management company executive, Beijing (August 7, 2019)

We can ' t continue waste sorting in an open manner. One time I saw drones monitoring our yards.

-Migrant interviewee, Beijing (August 8, 2019)

There is no way a migrant school can survive anymore. A land lease now costs millions of yuan a year.

-Former migrant children school principal, Beijing (August 6, 2019)

T he Chinese state has proclaimed a green turn in the past decade, declaring a ' war against pollution ' in 2014 and introducing a series of green initiatives. More than US$1 billion was invested to treat environmental pollution in China between 2008 and 2017. 1 Two documentary films by a

Chinese independent journalist, Beijing Besieged by Waste and Plastic China , were released in 2011 and 2016, respectively, and attracted global public attention to waste disposal and recycling in China. Trash has emerged as a central focus of rhetoric in this green drive. In March 2017, the central government set out a nationwide campaign for a compulsory ' waste sorting ' plan in forty-six cities, later praised by state media as heralding the ' era of compulsory garbage sorting ' ( ' The era of compulsory garbage sorting begins ' 2019). In April 2017, China ' s Central Leading Group for Comprehensively Deepening Reforms issued a notification prohibiting the import of twenty-four types of solid wastes, justifying that ' large amounts of dirty wastes or even hazardous wastes are mixed in the solid waste ' imports, polluting ' China ' s environment seriously ' ; the order cited an urgency to protect ' China ' s environmental interests and people ' s health ' (World Trade Organization 2017). This ban has resulted in sharply reduced waste imports and shifting global trade (Wen et al. 2021). Since 2020, China has set more goals, from pledging to become ' carbon neutral ' by 2060 to banning all solid waste imports starting in January 2021 ( ' China to ban all solid

<!-- image -->

waste imports ' 2020; Mallapaty 2020). More recently, it was announced that by 2025, China will reuse 60 percent of its urban household waste, although the country reportedly failed to reach some of its past goals and is dealing with backlogged wastes (Reuters 2021).

China ' s green development drive has not just stayed at the top level. In 2018, the state council initiated a Zero-Waste City pilot program aimed at ' reducing generation and promoting recycling of solid waste, reducing landfill and minimizing the environmental impact of solid waste, by promoting green development and green lifestyles ' in cities (Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the PRC [MEE] 2018). In 2019, Shanghai launched the country ' s most stringent trash-sorting regulations. Following the 2020 renewal of the Solid Waste Law, strengthening local states ' role in waste management and supervision, Chinese cities were urged to roll out pilot plans for ' circular economic parks ' (China Association of Circular Economy 2021), adapted from a European concept that had remained largely in the discussion stage for years (Su et al. 2013).

China ' s green publicity efforts, progressive environmental policies, and state and municipal plans have barely recognized and continue to obscure a hidden geography of waste recycling. Outside of the state sector, as many as 10 million people, mostly migrants, worked as waste pickers and recyclers in cities and towns across the country. 2 In Beijing, China ' s largest municipal waste generating city, between 170,000 and 300,000 people, mostly migrants, worked in the sector during the mid2010s, recovering over 90 percent of the city ' s recyclables (Z. Li et al. 2009; J. Wang 2018; C. Wang 2019). Over a span of three decades, these migrants formed moving spaces based on sophisticated waste recycling networks that have constantly shifted between visibility and invisibility, evolving from an ' alternate space ' for migrant survival in cities, to a thriving ' hidden ' business, to being displaced and vanishing from the public eye. Dongxiaokou was the last, most visible recycling village and migrant work -life community within Beijing ' s city proper; it consisted of 28,100 to 30,000 workers at one point, processing one-fourth to one-third of Beijing ' s total recyclables, representing $1 billion in transaction value. It was bulldozed in the mid-2010s (Tao, Tong, and Ferri 2014; L. Chen 2016; H. Wang 2017; K. Li 2020). Driven out, migrants now commute for long-distance recovery and shipping of city recyclable wastes. The COVID-19 pandemic further exacerbated impacts on migrant worker livelihood, not only by disrupting their movement between rural and urban areas. During lockdowns, gated neighborhoods solicited ' formal ' recycling company service while they banned waste picking and even stopped allowing legally employed migrants at community recycling stations to handle mounting trash (Zong 2020). In the meantime, Beijing ' s municipal waste nearly doubled between 2007 and 2019 with a waste amount exceeding that of any province. 3

Despite sporadic media and academic attention, a historical geography of stigmatization and exclusion of migrant waste workers, lived space, and citizenship remains largely untold. Most informal waste workers in Beijing are chain migrants from the populous inland Henan Province. Due to earlier waves of migration pushed by poverty, many have suffered discrimination from a ' propagation of negative stereotypes ' (Honig 1992b, 294), associating them with ' dirty, messy, and backward ' jobs and with pejorative social categories imposed by the elite such as unskilled, uncivilized, and even criminality prone. This has created a native-place-based hierarchy and prejudice like those experienced by ethnic identity groups or immigrants in other countries (Honig 1992a, 1996). Intersecting with the native-place-based prejudice are state and municipal efforts to discourage and curb an ' undesirable ' migrant population ( wailai renkou ) from entering China ' s largest cities. Such efforts, which have been taking place since the 1980s, have been described by Chinese scholars as ' fiascos ' and ' repeated defeats ' (Sit and Liu 2014, 247). Therefore, migrant waste workers in Beijing epitomize struggles and resilience against draconian policies over decades. Chronologically, these policies include, but are not limited to, a nationwide shourong qiansong (custody and repatriation) policy from 1982 to 2003, municipal government control over migrant populations through restricting jobs available to migrants before 2004 and designating hundreds of types of work as ' low-end ' before the 2008 Olympics, and another round of campaign-style drives since 2014 to control population -including a widely criticized city-wide eviction of ' low-end ' migrants from numerous informal structures designated as ' potential safety hazards ' in 2017. 4

As an exemplar city to study the hidden geography of waste, Beijing also stands in contrast to studies done on trash politics, garbage activism, and visibility advocacies elsewhere in the world. How does the ' hidden and hiding ' nature of a large, underdocumented, migrant-run waste economy and space, with constant displacements and continued exclusion, inform geographies of waste and exclusions? The question applies particularly to a line of work critiquing waste as ' abject, ' created ' through its always incomplete exclusion, ' and ' creat[ing] society through its expulsion ' (Moore 2012, 792; Whitson 2011). As waste geographies help explain that ' the exclusionary practices that seek to establish the (always porous) boundaries between clean and dirty (self and other) often reinforce the physical marginalization of some groups from urban space ' and assert that ' processes of expelling wasted

objects, places, and people are essential to the production of modern spaces and citizens ' (Moore 2012, 792), how has a state-produced, yet shifting, boundary between ' informal ' and ' formal ' contributed to a hidden geography of recycling? How have the state and other players sanctioned and facilitated the burgeoning, entrepreneurial success of a migrant-run recycling industry yet simultaneously hindered its growth and reinforced migrant exclusions in the context of a high-modernist state with ascending ' environmental authoritarianism ' to further other state goals such as social control (Y. Li and Shapiro 2020)?

Recognizing the abundant literature on waste in China, much of which reflects the vicissitudes of Chinese state rhetoric, this article offers an intervention by centering the discussion on the neglected geography of people, spaces, knowledge from the ground. By asking why this geography has remained hidden, we hope our work not only strengthens emergent scholarship on China ' s waste geography (Tong and Tao 2016), but also resonates with a growing body of geographical studies on trash politics, (in)visibility, and inequality by placing trash and waste issues into China ' s migrant exclusion context. We take Dharavi as a heuristic inspiration to empower a foregrounding and privileging of the hidden migrant recycling in our case city. In the following sections, we discuss a context for positioning China and Beijing ' s waste geographies, then draw from the scholarly literature on trash as ' out of place, ' exposing contradictions of modern cities as well as writings on garbage citizenship and China ' s migrant citizenship. We argue that a shifting rhetoric of waste as both ' out of place ' and ' useful, ' in conjunction with long-term excluded migrant citizenship, has contributed to the obscuring and forced fade-out of China ' s own hidden ' Dharavi. ' Next, we examine the case of Henancun (urban villages within Beijing populated by migrants from Henan Province) with interview data and document analysis to trace the interfacing of state, municipality, enterprises, intellectuals, and urbanites in shaping a changing waste rhetoric toward obscuring both migrants and their recycling. Finally, we draw conclusions by arguing that from hidden to hiding, China ' s migrant waste workers have taken actions to remain resilient against an increasingly durable authoritarian governance on both urban social and environmental fronts.

## ' Dharavi ' in Beijing or Not: Waste, Recycling, and Migrant Exclusions

Situating China in a Global Context of Waste Recycling and Inequality

The relationship of waste recycling and inequality is extensively documented in a large body of research and policy papers on informal recycling in the Global South. Informal work is the long-standing mode of organization in the scrap sector (waste picking and recycling), with formalization of waste collection and disposal in developed countries having only a century ' s history (O ' Neill 2019). Low social status is ascribed to ' scavengers ' and others in the sector, often comprising outcasts and marginal groups including migrants (Medina 2000). Double exclusions prevail because low-income neighborhoods, slums, and squatter settlements both provide labor and suffer as a dumping ground for municipal solid waste. Up to 2 percent of the urban population in Asian and Latin American cities survive on scavenging (Medina 2000). Worldwide, tens of millions of livelihoods depend on informal recycling, which largely involves manual labor, with the informal and micro-enterprise collection and recycling sector providing a livelihood to about 0.5 percent of the total population in developing countries (Scheinberg, Wilson, and Rodic-Wiersma 2010; Wilson et al. 2012). Notably, resource recovery from solid waste relies heavily on informal recycling activities in many low- and middle-income developing countries; such activities account for 20 to 30 percent of the solid waste recycled in those countries (Velis et al. 2012). Waste-picking and informal recycling promote grassroots investment by the poor, provide employment, conserve resources, and protect the environment. Waste pickers are increasingly organized and have formed alliances, most prominently in Latin American countries and India, but also in other Asian and African countries. As the only source of waste collection, they are a significant ' environmental and economic contributor, ' providing crucial income to families and local economies as well as widespread benefits to public health, public safety, and environmental sustainability (Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing [WIEGO] 2021a). These activities are often unrecognized by the solid waste and resource management programs throughout the Global South, however, and increasingly face multiple challenges from corporate competition, legal barriers to right to work, and waste-to-energy plants that deprive them of livelihoods (Ahmed and Ali 2004; Wilson et al. 2009; Afon 2012; Velis et al. 2012; WIEGO 2021b).

China ' s role as a major recipient and mass producer of waste, its relevance in the half-trillion-dollar recycling industry, and its recent zero-waste initiatives have made it an important case for research on the global political economy of waste (Minter 2013; O ' Neill 2019). In the process of becoming the world ' s factory, China has struggled with environmental problems and resource shortages. Since 2002, its resource consumption has surged, and its energy consumption doubled during the 2000s (Su et al. 2013). In 2004, China surpassed

the United States as the world ' s largest waste generator (The World Bank 2012). A rapidly growing economy, increasing urban population, and rising urban affluence have contributed to a near-doubling of municipal solid waste (MSW) in Chinese cities (The World Bank 2012), from 136.5 million tons in 2006 to 235.6 million in 2019 (Huang et al. 2006; MEE 2020). State data indicate that the composition of solid waste features high percentages of organics, and has included more recyclable, slowly biodegradable, and nonbiodegradable matters such as paper, plastics, and construction demolition tailings since the 1980s (S. Yang and Furedy 1993; H. Wang and Nie 2001; X. Chen, Geng, and Fujita 2010). It is also reported that the country ' s handling of MSW improved significantly from the 2 percent treatment and disposal rate before 1990 to 77.9 percent by the end of 2010, reaching 94.1 percent in 2015 (Su et al. 2013; Zhou, Sun, and Yi 2017). These data fail to take into account, however, the roughly 20 percent of MSW that is recovered through informal collection and recycling, as the state has never recorded or published data on this segment (Hoornweg, Lam, and Chaudhry 2005; The World Bank 2012; Linzner and Salhofer 2014). This omission of a massive informal sector also raises further questions about the proclaimed environmental objectives of China ' s waste import bans; for example, Brooks, Wang, and Jambeck (2018) pointed out that from 2010 to 2016, China ' s import of plastic waste added only 10 to 13 percent to the amount of plastic waste generated domestically.

China ' s informal waste workers, including those engaging in waste collecting, processing, and shipping (as pickers, buyers, shippers, and middlemen), are primarily migrants. Since the 1980s they have silently filled the enormous gaps between China ' s escalating industrial resource needs, a withered socialist formal recycling sector, a developing solid waste infrastructure, and skyrocketing waste generation. China has consistently lacked an official definition or tabulation of informal workers and those who work in informal recycling. Among the few estimates by scholars, one often-cited study suggests that an informal labor force of 100 to 200 million, mainly rural migrants, works in sectors such as car washing, community security, child care, waste recycling, and transportation (see Hu and Zhao 2006). In China, rural migrants dominate both informal jobs and sectors; they are self-employed, employees without contracts, unpaid family workers, or smallbusiness employers (Park, Wu, and Du 2012). Whereas Chinese media have often cited a figure of 6 million people working in waste picking across the country, based on a World Bank brief by Medina (2008), a later study suggests that a wider interval -1.2 to 15 million, or roughly 0.2 to 2.5 percent of the urban population -work in the informal recycling sector, representing 3 percent of the migrant workers in urban areas (Linzner and Salhofer 2014). 5 In Beijing, hundreds of thousands (a range of 130,000 -300,000, or 0.66 -2.56 percent of its population) are estimated to work in the informal recycling sector (Linzner and Salhofer 2014), 6 and journalists reported at least 170,000 worked in Beijing ' s informal recycling sector during its peak in 2014 (see, e.g., ' Army of waste pickers? ' 2016; J. Wang 2018). The number dropped significantly after 2015, when the city started to record net loss of nonhukou residents (those without local residency), from a peak of over 8 million, or 38 percent of the city ' s 21.7 million total population in 2015 (Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics 2019).

## Waste and Migrants as ' Out of Place ' in Chinese Cities

Conceptually, we draw from two strands of work -one focusing on trash as material out of place, the other on migrant citizenship -to trace the trajectory of waste recycling groups and spaces proliferating while both being perceived as out of place in Chinese cities. One strand of research involves geographical studies of waste, particularly those that critique waste as either positive or negative but forming a dualist relationship with (or as separated from) the society (Moore 2012). As Whitson (2011) summarized, geographers have contributed to a theorization of waste through seeing the act of disposal as the ' end point of consumption ' and thus an integral part of ' viewing consumption as a social activity. ' This has enabled an understanding of disposal not only as part of larger material and identity-making processes, but also historically inscribed with social relations (Hetherington 2004; Whitson 2011). To geographers, waste exposes the contradictions of modernization and the modern city. Thus, geographers have called for new geographies of waste to cast light on the increasing connectedness of people and places by flows of waste, the politics of waste, and waste as an important lens for studying social inequality (Moore 2012). Douglas ' s work on purity and pollution provides a foundation for many geographers to critique waste as ' a material out of place, ' dirt, abject, or disorder. Douglas (1966) wrote that pollution ideas relate to social order in instrumental and expressive ways, and ' ideas about separating, purifying, demarcating and punishing transgressions have as their main function to impose system on an inherently untidy experience ' (4). In other words, ' seeing ' dirt and ' having the authority to designate what is dirty and what is clean is more politically salient and rhetorically powerful than actually dealing with it ' (Brownell 2014, 211). Further, Douglas (1966) suggested that it is exactly the ' exaggerating the difference between within and without ' (4) that creates a semblance of order. In resonance, Harvey (2006) noted that, in the modern

city, the ' spatial pattern enforces a moral order ' and those ' out of place ' ' disturb the ecological harmonies, pollute the moral order, and must pay the price ' (40). Hence, modern cities have hidden spaces, because whenever there is an order imposed, there are always people left out of it. It is important to note that the hidden does not represent chaos or disorder, but rather reminds of suspensions of order. The state plays a role as it reproduces its power through the process of constructing and reconstructing categories of legitimacy and illegitimacy, defining what is formal and what is informal, and determining which forms of informality will thrive or disappear, and when (Roy 2005).

Increasingly, case studies shed light on the intersection of waste and citizenship, as seen from Latin American cities ' displacement of waste and waste workers (Whitson 2011) and garbage strikes (Moore 2009) to the rise of garbage citizenship (a more inclusive citizenship reclaimed through strikes and trash revolts) in neoliberal African cities such as Dakar (Fredericks 2018), and the struggles for visibility of waste reclaimers in Johannesburg. Waste pickers have been highlighted as political actors furthering social inclusion and drivers of social change in some Global South cities (Dias 2016). As Fredericks ' s (2018) study in Dakar, Senegal reveals, ' modes of rendering people disposable are met with strategies of refusal that validate labor that has been stigmatized and degraded ' (150). On the flip side of waste workers becoming visible and organized in some cities, we see a history and contemporaneous geography of modernistic state excluding both trash and people to the ' filthy peripheries. ' As Brownell (2014) stated, ' [t]he discussions of dirt and displacement often went hand in hand ' (209). Her study of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, illustrates how a ' state capitalized on colonial narratives of sanitation and urban control to rid the city of its ' disorderly ' people ' and a rhetoric of waste remains a tool of purging urban areas and reining in uncontrollable urban growth (Brownell 2014, 209). Recent studies in South Africa reveal that initiatives to integrate waste pickers into municipal waste management systems reflect the same logic underpinning colonialism, which is ' a mechanism of border control designed to eject and dispossess reclaimers rather than include them ' (Samson 2020, 60). These case studies highlight the divergence between waste and waste recycling as a historically organic part of Global South cities and an imposed waste management system and urban governance adopted from the Global North. Further, they speak cogently on how citizens see and use urban space is different from demographically marginal urban elite ' s imagination of the city as clean and segregated from ' dirty ' and ' chaotic ' spaces. The latter is often intermingled with postcolonial or neoliberal state goals in discipline, such as through criminalizing waste recovery (Brownell

2014; Dias 2016). In a global contemporaneous space, cities in the Global North have seen waste, dirt, and discard used as a rhetoric and power strategy adopted by both sides of the Occupy movement (Liboiron 2012). 7

Therefore, another relevant strand of work focuses on the interlocking of China ' s hukou system and migrant citizenship, which helps explicate why China ' s waste workers and spaces are hidden. Scholars have long commented on hukou as the core problem of an institutionalized discrimination against rural transients, as China ' s rural migrants have faced stringent obstacles or been barred from full citizenship. Solinger (1999, 5) observed that not only the peasants ' lot in Chinese cities by the mid1990s was ' akin to that of black people in South Africa before the 1990s or of blacks and Asians in the United States throughout the first half of the twentieth century, ' but the ' sojourning peasants ' or migrants concentrated outside the city as a form of segregation forced upon them to meet daily needs when they were denied urban services. Resembling ' ethnic enclaves, ' migrants formed intermediate spaces, groups, and communities based on provincial origins of migration to access alternate citizenship (Solinger 1999). It is critical to note that hukou is a historically rooted oppressive system, formalized by the state in the 1950s. It has continued to be affirmed on various state levels, granting institutional advantages (for accessing employment, education, housing, and social security benefits) to those with an urban or local registration, and has continued to afford flexibility to central and local states in dealing with mounting migrant population needs. Defying neoliberal theorizations, J. Wu (2010) forcefully argued that China ' s discriminatory treatment of migrant workers under conditions of ' differential citizenship ' is a process where a modern working-class formation with feudal characteristics is met with a demand of labor by globalization. The differentiating principle in allocating citizenship rights is ' used by central and local governments and beneficiaries of the urban regime as a defense against the demands of aspiring migrant workers ' (J. Wu 2010, 80). Indeed, the Chinese central state has decentralized hukou reform to local states. During the lengthy process of hukou reform ' experiments, ' however, criticism of the system has also been tactically dissolved. Further, local hukou reforms aimed at welcoming migrant labor have barely made a dent in the largest cities -and have been completely stalled by unmotivated municipalities (L. Wu 2013). After less than two decades of modest hukou reform, the situation came full circle in 2017 with a widely criticized city drive against migrant neighborhoods in Beijing, where tens of thousands of migrants were evicted (Buckley 2017). Despite strides made in China ' s medium and small cities, recent scholarship reaffirms that the Chinese hukou system has evolved

as an apparatus of social citizenship, with modalities of bordering comparable to those used in the forced exclusion of the migrant poor and the differential inclusion of international labor migration in other contexts (Zhang 2018). We argue that the durable hukou system has reinforced the ' persistent distrust of transients ' in Chinese society (J. Y. Chen 2012), associating vagrants with indigence and criminality. Today, many migrants are still ' ghost workers ' at the bottom of the citizenship hierarchy, enjoying limited to zero urban membership rights, as depicted in Wu ' s (2010) words.

They are invisible on official dossiers and statistical yearbooks; they are not participants in the social security system; and they are truly mobile and fluid, as suggested by government classification of them as the ' floating population. ' They are like ' ghosts ' haunting the skies above and the earth beneath China ' s booming cities. (72)

From the above lenses, existing research on China ' s waste recycling largely reflects a dualistic conceptualization of waste and society as separate spheres, mostly oriented toward a waste-management perspective that focuses on ' end-of-pipe ' solutions based on seeing waste as an externality or risk, but valuable material. Likewise, China ' s migrant waste workers are considered by privileged urbanites (with hukou) as not part of the city, if not ' disposable, ' and their labor is characterized as ' hard work to reduce waste and clean the city ' while engaging in a ' low-end ' yet ' lucrative ' business (J. Wang 2018). Despite some sympathetic literature expounding the intricate nature of informal recycling as an old and promising green solution (Minter 2013), recent studies on China ' s informal recycling largely treat it as subordinate to or a self-sustained sector outside of a formal system, and warn of the environmental and health impacts of informal recycling (H. Yang et al. 2018). There are scant critical analyses from a waste-society relational perspective on how waste refusal, massive recycling, and extreme exclusions coexist and are mutually constitutive and how the state has included and excluded waste and migrant recycling workers to maintain social order. China ' s informal recycling is deeply and profoundly embedded in and intertwined with the country ' s structural inequality and migrant citizenship crisis. As Whitson (2011) stated, geographies of waste and disposal are ' increasingly central to understanding social relations and social change ' (1405). In this regard, we argue that the Chinese case of migrant recycling contributes to connecting geographies of waste with the ' maintenance of social inequality ' as Whitson described. More specifically, it illustrates how a largely hidden community has grown from the space created by the contradictions of postreform China (with the retreat of socialist formal recycling and increasing wastes), evolved with the state ' s flexible inclusions and expulsions of the sector, suffered from deepening exclusions of migrants and their excluded right to citizenship, and remained resilient in the face of a high modernist urban imagination that serves state goals. Our study connects with knowledge on the ground and broader issues discussed in waste geography and citizenship studies in the Global South. We next provide a historical and geographical context for the empirical focus of Henancun, Beijing.

## Henancun in Beijing: Why Not Dharavi?

The contradictions in China ' s waste crisis are most acutely spatially manifested as migrant waste workers ' need for space (Dias 2016), and growing demands for spatial clustering face competing interests in the rapidly rising land values of a superlarge city. Therefore, this article focuses empirically on waste-recycling villages in Beijing formed by migrants mostly from Henan Province since the 1980s. There were almost twenty such villages with a total population of 200,000 to 300,000 migrants during peak times. According to our interviews and various reports, many Henan migrants experienced times of being driven by demolitions and bans to form new recycling villages further toward the margins of the city (between the 4th and 6th ring roads), with each lasting no more than five years (Figure 1). Despite intermittent journalist and research accounts (mostly in the Chinese language), there is insufficient critical analysis of this largely hidden community.

Henancun is not indicative of a fixed location; it is an alias used by locals to name almost any urban or suburban village inhabited mostly by migrants from Henan Province in various Chinese localities. In Beijing, migrants from Hebei, Henan, and Anhui Provinces constitute most of the informal labor force (as self-employed, employer, and employees; Xia 1998). Migrants mostly from Gushi County in Henan Province have eked out a living in waste picking and later recycling, and created a waste material recycling network contingent on hybrid live -work spaces on rented land in urban villages; they ascribed these spaces with characteristics of native-place culture and grassroots self-organization. Used in convenience to describe these communities, the name Henancun reinforces a stereotype of their identity as an ' outsider ' and as a transient, ' floating ' population. Although waste pickers are often pushed into the sector by poverty and belong to the most vulnerable groups (Medina 2000), the first waves of Henan migrants entered the informal waste sector when there was great demand for labor in clearing garbage from an already ' waste-besieged ' city in the 1980s. Some of the villages were already hosting as many as 8,000 migrants in the early 1990s, derogatively named

<!-- image -->

NEICHRORHOOD

Figure 1 Displaced migrant recycling villages in Beijing over time and across space, 1990 -2015.

' garbage villages ' by locals (C. Tang and Feng 2000) and state media even today. District governments launched campaigns to ' clean up ' and ' rectify ' ( qingli zhengdun ) Henancun and other migrant work -life villages (H. Wang et al. 1997) as early as the 1980s, setting off decades of drives against migrant concentrations, resulting in hiding and coping strategies (depicted by Chinese scholars as ' guerilla war ' ) as displaced migrants constantly had to relocate and rebuild work and living spaces. 8 Dongxiaokou, the last and largest such village within the 6th ring road, was home to 30,000 recycling workers and 1,000 recyclables buyers, reducing Beijing ' s recyclable waste by nearly one third (Yan 2012). It existed for ten years before a prolonged demolition began in the 2010s. In this sense, Henancun is a spatial-temporal ensemble of all short-lived, if not ephemeral, spatially displaced communities formed concurrently or in succession to sustain migrant waste work and lived spaces.

We use Dharavi heuristically to encourage a foregrounding of Henancun and parse out its relative obscurity and invisibility. Dharavi, with its 1

million population, is a fishing-village-turned-slum and billion-dollar circular economy based on recycling 80 percent of Mumbai ' s solid waste (Dey 2018). It has a fixed locality and space characterized with ' compacted spread of energy, enterprise, deprivation and desperation, ' an epitome of the crisis of rapidly growing Indian cities (Sharma 2000, XVI). As Weinstein (2014) recounted, Dharavi was a dumping ground for the city of Bombay, evolving from an illegal garbage dump to a convenient depot for nearby construction waste. In today ' s Mumbai, the plastic waste recycling industry is almost completely informal (close to 90 percent being unlicensed or illegally sublet). Around 150,000 waste pickers collect almost all the daily generation of 700 million tons of plastic waste in the city (Vaidya, Kumar, and Sharma 2016).

Dharavi in Mumbai and Henancun in Beijing provide an interesting juxtaposition of structural characteristics, whereby settlers in both communities share experiences with outcastes in other contexts. Both caste slavery to Dharavi and the Chinese

' urban/rural caste barrier ' (W. Tang and Parish 2000, 30) to Henancun resemble the institution of slavery in the United States and its continuing legacy (Roberts 2016, 2). Dharavi is a location for tanneries and potters often associated with lower castes or Muslims, whereas studies over decades have suggested the indigent in urban China share similarities with the Dalits ( ' untouchables ' ) in Indian society (Solinger 2018). The Dalits being treated as ' minors who required special supervision ' (Roberts 2016, 8) is similar to the experiences of migrant laborers in China (Fang 2019). Both Dharavi and Henancun embody the migrant experience that cannot be diminished as ahistorical (transient or temporary) or nonsettling in space (either bound to return to rural homes or moving freely to take economic ' advantages ' of cities).

Nevertheless, the visibility of a durable and vibrant Dharavi and its scholarship are in stark contrast to the subdued and often sidelined, piecemeal accounts of a dislocated and fading Henancun in Beijing. Dharavi ' s durability is rationalized with the state ' s benevolent ' supportive neglect, ' which allows ' illegal ' businesses and housing to proliferate, as slum enterprises provide gainful employment to millions while helping ' address the city ' s growing need for industrial spaces and worker housing, with minimal publicor private-sector expenditure ' (Weinstein 2014, 27). It has been stated that Dharavi illustrates how the state ' endorses and encourages illegality with one hand, while trying to curb it with the other ' (Sharma 2000, xix). As Dharavi stands as a recycling machine and thriving community for hundreds of thousands waste pickers and workers, it has become challenging to not use it as a tool for reimagining, reconceptualizing, and reflecting on the disrupted geographies of migrant recycling communities elsewhere. In the following, we critically examine the state ' s flexible inclusion and exclusion of waste and migrant waste workers through the interfacing of state, municipality, and other stakeholders in shaping the hidden and hiding geography of migrant recycling in Beijing. We focus on three stages.

## The Case of Migrant Recycling in Henancun, Beijing: Between Visible and Invisible

The case study is based on a triangulation of site visits, observations, surveys, and interview data from a decade-long project in Beijing (2009 -2019), within and outside three villages of Henancun, as well as document analysis of reports, policies, and more than 300 journalist and research accounts. We draw from interviews that took place in 2015, 2016, and 2019 with close to forty stakeholders, including municipal city appearance management and district commerce administrators, county and town government officials, the Association of Metal Scrap Utilization (CAMU), district waste recycling company managers, migrant waste buyers and pickers, experts and intellectuals, and migrant school principals.

## Turning ' Ghost ' Street Recycling into a Socialist Order

Waste reusing and recycling have existed in China for more than a thousand years. Beijing ' s trash issues date back to the early twentietth century. Beijing Chronicles documented that ' the city ' s waste collection system was severely lagging behind with trashes piling up like mountains inside the city ' before 1949, and itinerant waste buyers tricycled from street to street to collect recyclables from households before dawn, creating what were called ' ghost markets ' (Ding and Li 2011). Waste trading markets had already formed in the urban -rural fringe of southern Beijing. In 1954, the city changed its waste collection service to nighttime to reduce trash piles in the city center, and municipal waste began to be transported to rural areas for disposal starting in 1955. According to both informants and articles (Ding and Li 2011), during the ' high tide ' of socialist transition in 1956, the Beijing government formed a publicly owned company to incorporate more than 10,000 waste pickers and buyers, turning them into state employees. In 1958 the ' ghost markets ' intervolved in daily urban life were eliminated and replaced by organized, collectively owned enterprises under public -private joint management. Waste recycling became formally integrated into a socialist order of material circulation and city life. In a time of extreme resource shortage in the 1950s and 1960s, recycling became an important resource recovery method (Wilson et al. 2009). Forming a large company, however, also reflects an attempt to regulate and control the ' nonproductive ' mobility of ' vagrants ' and ' peddlers ' and turn them into productive socialist working poor, to help differentiate state enemies from good ' laboring people ' (J. Y. Chen 2012, 227). The result was a large system encompassing state-employed recycling workers, facilities, and mobilized citizens. A city hierarchical system directing a flow of sorted recyclable materials from neighborhood collection spots to recycling stations, district recycling companies, and factories was overseen by a Waste Bureau under the National Supply and Marketing Cooperatives. Sorting and selling recyclables were made a visible part of the daily life for the few living in cities and for stateowned enterprises, mandated and necessitated by a resource shortage. The value of waste was also made visible when Beijing provided trade-in programs to incentivize citizens to recycle such items as used batteries and toothpaste tubes. Officials today still

remember this socialist municipal waste recycling model, from households to recycling system and incinerators, as an early success and exemplar (Ding and Li 2011; CAMU interview 2015). By the 1970s, almost 2,000 recycling stations were distributed throughout all hutongs of Beijing ' s traditional city proper within the 2nd ring road (Yu and Xiang 2019).

' Uncontrollable ' Wastes and Migrant Spaces and State-Sanctioned ' Informal ' Recycling

Soon after economic reform, Beijing faced a new trash crisis. In the 1980s, the waste composition changed drastically with more plastics, papers, rubbers, and other nonbiodegradables. One informant said, ' Since 1979, rural villages began to resist the dumping of city trash. ' Garbage also became an obstacle to the city ' s urbanization and modernization. Journalists reported retrospectively that the city was already a ' city besieged by waste ' in the early 1980s. Nearly 4,700 open dumping sites of over 16 square meters were identified between the 3rd and the 4th ring roads in 1983, according to Beijing ' s official data (Ding and Li 2011; J. Wang 2018).

A withering socialist recycling system -largely a result of the state ' s decision to allocate industrial waste reuse and recycling profits back to stateowned enterprises in 1979 -compromised a large source of revenue for municipal waste recycling in cities. State recycling jobs became less attractive to urbanites as the market prices of recyclable wastes no longer offered an incentive, and neighborhood collection spots and recycling stations were closed while land was given to higher return land users. The priority of the municipal government was to reduce the garbage inside the city, and by the end of the 1990s, the city had built 230 garbage collection containers (Ding and Li 2011).

In the meantime, the influx of rural migrants after the relaxation of rural -urban mobility regulations provided an easy fix for the financially stressed municipal government that needed labor to reduce overflowing garbage in city dumps. Despite the earliest Henancun with part-time migrant recyclers emerging in 1979 (T. Yang et al. 1995), our interviews (in 2015) and articles validate that in the 1980s, city bureaucracies sanctioned and facilitated migrants to enter open dumps to carve out a living and self-organize as waste pickers (J. Wang 2018; Yu and Xiang 2019). National media showcased photos of migrant families and children smiling in self-built shacks inside large garbage dumps (Y. Li 2003). Some officials sought rents in return for granting migrant access to waste dumps. In published accounts (J. Wang 2018; Yu and Xiang 2019) and our interviews, officials told of migrant groups engaging in ' tug-of-wars ' and fiercely competing for niches, and of bureaucratic officials ' arbitrating ' migrant groups into specific types of jobs based on native places in the late 1990s.

I was transferred to the city government to manage waste dumping sites in 1987. Several migrants came and they dressed thinly in a cold winter day. They asked if they could pick wastes from one dumping site for survival. I wrote an official letter to allow them to enter the site. … They brought hundreds of fellow migrants with them into the site. I thought waste-picking was good to the city government, making our job easier. The packing, shipping and processing of one ton of waste would cost us 158 yuan then. … They built shacks to work and live on site and cleared the entire site. Each picker could earn 1,500 yuan a month. This was 1987 when a government official ' s wage was 70 yuan per month. (Beijing 2015)

Under tacit sanctions by the municipal government, more Henan migrants entered recycling, formed specialized native-place-based networks, shared infrastructure with municipal sanitation services, and worked seamlessly in a relay to ship sorted recyclable waste out to manufacturers in neighboring Hebei until the 2010s.

Each [migrant group] has their specialization, even until today. Migrants from Sichuan Province [over 50,000] could only pick wastes but not engage in recycling, while migrants from Henan [over 17,000] could only engage in recycling [including collecting recyclables from households, sorting, packing, etc.] but not pick wastes, except for electronic wastes. Migrants from Hebei [over 10,000] can only stay outside of the fourth ring road [to transport recyclables]. Between the fourth and fifth ring roads, there were eighty-two trading spots licensed by the government … after 7 p.m. each day, municipal sanitation took all the nonrecyclable trash from 921 neighborhood garbage stations in the city. Recyclers also brought recyclable materials here for transactions with middlemen, who then shipped them out to the eighty-two trading spots where wastes are further sorted and shipped for reuse in Hebei Province. (Beijing 2015)

In the 1990s, the state and public rhetoric was dominated by the attention on trash as unsanitary and a costly nuisance to the city. This coincided with ascending prejudice against migrant laborers, who were considered ' polluting, ' burdensome, and causing shocks to urban districts as migrant concentrations grew dramatically in the 1990s. Scholars warned that the rapid spreading of slums and autonomous grassroots spaces by migrants would lead to ' deformed urbanization, ' increasing crimes by a ' floating population ' and uncontrollable in-

migration, a situation ' out of control, ' breeding ' environmental, law and order issues ' (T. Yang et al. 1995, 17; Z. Yang 1995, 20). District government campaigns of ' cleaning up ' migrant villages were accompanied by continued depictions of ' garbage villages ' and associating them with ' dirty environment, severe pollution, and worrisome sanitation ' (T. Yang et al. 1995, 14; Tan 1997, 51). Migrants were blamed on the one hand for increasing the ' burden ' to the city and for their ' migratory status ' and seasonal move (due to housing shortages, discrimination, and their hukou), and on the other hand for their ' lack of responsibility to urban communities ' (T. Yang et al. 1995, 17; Fu 1998, 29, 30). From the 1980s to the 1990s, the municipality ' s strategy shifted between ' temporary tolerance and constant obstruction, ' including launching two campaigns to control and manage the floating population in 1999, repatriating close to 80,000 and mobilizing 158,000 people to leave Beijing (W. Jin 2001). A largely populated Henancun was demolished in 1992, but Henancun continued to thrive --by 1993, many Henan migrants shifted toward leasing land to become scrapyard owners and buyers, and Henancun experienced the first wave of expansion, proliferating in multiple locations (C. Tang and Feng 2000).

Amid persistent prejudice against migrants and rising criticisms over the sentiment, the state ' s initial intention to formalize recycling around 2000 was soon suspended. In 2003, the tragic death of a young migrant in Guangzhou and nationwide anger and repercussions resulted in the state ' s abolishment of the Custody and Repatriation Law. In 2005, the People ' s Congress of Beijing municipality appealed the Regulations of Beijing Municipality on Administration of Workers and Businessmen in Beijing Originating from Other Localities, officially ending the enforceable legal basis for outright discrimination and the police expulsion of migrants. Both have enormously relieved migrants of the anxiety of being detained and repatriated if they failed to present a temporary residence certificate, which had disproportionately affected migrant waste workers; they were more likely to be subjected not only to the permit mandate, but also to violence and banishment as ' vagrants ' or ' casual labor ' due to their accents, attire, and their work and daily mobility. Another effect of the nullifications was to set free rural labor in poverty, resulting in new waves of migrant labor into recycling. In addition, the demolition and construction spree following Beijing ' s successful bid in 2000 for the Summer Olympics in 2008 spurred the expansion of the scrap market. For example, in Beijing, the number of migrant-run scrap metal recycling stations increased thirty-fourfold between 2002 and 2005. 9 Both migrants and officials recount stories (in our interviews in 2015) about how the city ' s numerous construction sites became lucrative ' mining fields ' for migrant recyclers, who secured access to these sites through networks with powerful employees of state sectors, leading to a rapid burgeoning of recycling and migrant entrepreneurship.

The late 1990s witnessed increasing competition from waste imports, increased taxes on recycling, and layoffs plaguing the state sectors. Concerned with both the future of recycling and the impacts of the private and self-owned recycling work force on the privileged state employees and social stability, former state resource recycling officials called for a revival of the state recycling sector, a liberation of waste from ' trash or garbage ' and redefining it as valuable and part of a ' Recyclable Resource Industry ' (Z. Wu 1999). In fact, by the late 1990s, both former state recycling companies and local towns and villages had already built a symbiotic yet hidden relationship with migrants in shaping an ' informal ' geography. First, former state-owned district recycling companies -burdened by overhead costs -began subleasing land and granting licenses to migrant recyclers during the 1990s while the companies remained on paper as managers or landlords. Hence, these semiclosed state-owned recycling companies formed collaborations with (as both caretaker and exploiter of) migrant recyclers and their businesses, giving ascendence to a rhetoric that waste is ' valuable and profitable ' but needs regulation despite continued state neglect. Second, due to skyrocketing demand for space beyond state land, multiple locations of Henancun consolidated on collectively owned rural land in urban villages to satisfy a need for affordable recycling space close to the city proper. As Figure 2 shows, the entire reversed commodity chain (retail-to-bulk trading) from users to industries is largely composed of migrant recyclers (the biggest light-shaded block in the chart). Hidden from urbanites in walled open spaces, migrant yard owners and waste buyers rent land from villages, often subleasing from a migrant ' middleman landlord ' or a recycling company, and work and live in nearby housing to run family-scale recycling activities encompassing collecting, separating and sorting, processing, and transporting. This massive yet highly efficient ' black box ' involving substantial labor has been key to increasing the recycling rate and reducing the volume of solid waste in Beijing, which supports and connects Henancun with scaled, industrialized recycling companies. On the other end, it connects with numerous itinerant waste buyers and street waste pickers.

Despite a setback in 2008 due to the global financial crisis and ensuing price fluctuations, a massive sector involving 170,000 ' visible ' informal migrant waste workers in Beijing in 2012 was accountable for shipping 8 million tons of recyclables out of the city in 2011, and likely clearing more. In 2011, the total trash after recycling

Figure 2 Structure of ' informal ' recycling in Beijing in a symbiotic relationship with formal sectors. Source: J. Feng ( 2016 ).

<!-- image -->

received by the municipal sanitation service was 6.7 million tons (interviews, 2015). This spontaneous waste recycling industry reduced the municipal waste amount by more than half, a massive cost (3.7 billion yuan) that would otherwise have been paid by the city to expand its municipal waste processing capacity (Yu and Xiang 2019). It also provided more than 100,000 jobs and promoted resource conservation through a circular economy largely built and sustained by migrants. The number of informal waste workers increased in the peak years of 2014 and 2015, then shrank to 100,000 in 2019 (Yu and Xiang 2019).

Struggling over Visibility: Surviving Waste Spaces Against State, City, and Urban Citizen Contestations

When the value of recyclable waste became increasingly visible in the 2000s, migrants ' need for waste space subjected them to increasing contestations from the government of an expanding and ' modernizing ' municipality, as well as from aggressive district governments and gated urbanites. These occurred with an imposed categorization of the existing migrant recycling industry and its labor as nuisance and disorder, compounded by a labeling of recycling and recycling labor as ' low-end ' industry and population. The state ' s push for a boundary between the informal and formal has delegitimized migrant recycling, their developed business, and their use of space. This has also served to expel ' unwanted ' migrant populations from the city proper and make space for a state-envisioned, formal, modern recycling and circular economy that is yet to materialize.

Although it has been illegal to expulse migrants based on temporary residence permit after 2003, and many intellectuals and media called for granting ' citizenship treatment ' to migrant laborers, the

temporary residence certificate was still required of migrants to access resources in Beijing (and in effect until 2016). Migrant laborers continued to face obstacles to stay in the city. The municipal labor bureau listed eight industries and 103 occupations that limited migrant labor in 2000, a significant increase from 1995. Despite migrants ' laboring in preparing the city for the 2008 Olympics, their life --work spaces are still described as ' ungoverned zones ' outside the purview of urban street governance, village or town governance, and the Danwei (work unit) system (X. Feng 2004), and ' directly affecting the speed and level of Beijing ' s modernization and the implementation of the strategic vision of new Beijing new Olympics ' (Zhu 2005, 2).

Built on the reflection that a ' cleanup -runaway -resurgence -cleanup ' styled ' tug-of-war ' between migrants and municipality had not worked (Mu 2004), a new rhetoric soon emerged with targeted measures serving to ' informalize ' migrant recycling and labor and legitimate their exclusion from the city. First, the municipality rolled out the municipal master plan for 2004 through 2020 naming ' the population pressure on Beijing ' as one problem to tackle. Under this state-directed plan to turn Beijing into a world city, the municipal government hosted panel discussions to gather opinions, coopted experts and intellectuals, and claimed they would ease the population pressure through ' controlling urban villages ' and ' evacuating population through collaboration with neighboring Hebei and Tianjin ' (Quan 2005). Directed by special task forces of ' environment improvement for the Olympics, ' districts banned basement rental housing and demolished urban villages (Y. Li 2007). Second, the municipal government listed recycling as a primary target for ' enhancing the governance and formalization of low-end industries with severe problems of floating populations ' in 2006 ( ' Olympic urban legislation ' 2006). This association of reducing socalled low-end industries with strengthened ' floating population ' governance permeated almost all city and district master plans through 2017. Third, the 12th Five-Year Plan of Beijing, promulgated in 2011, provided more specified measures to ' curb disorderly rapid growth of population, implement hukou quota and residence certificate system (to replace temporary residence certificate), and orderly evacuate population from the core urban districts. ' In practice, this meant a strict and comprehensive control of ' unneeded talent ' and ' low-level talent ' from the floating population by limiting their access to residence certificates, jobs, and housing (J. Li 2011).

On the other hand, following increasing public awareness of the value of recyclables and the thriving recycling industry, the municipal government started working on a recycling facility layout plan, focusing on ' surveying the recycling industry, particularly the concentration of low-end population during the process of recycling, and analyzing the potential environmental, resource, safety concerns brought by this concentration. ' In 2006, eleven bureaus from the municipal government promulgated a pilot plan to promote the formal industrialization of recycling within three to five years, including sponsoring and incubating ' formal ' recycling companies to replace ' scattered and individualized ' recycling, formalizing community waste collection and sorting, and erasing informal waste trade centers. In one report, a state organization claimed that with a ' new ' formalized recycling network, only 10,000 workers would be needed and more than 100,000 existing migrant laborers could be ' evacuated. ' By 2006, in the city ' s outer suburban district, Tongzhou, 322 recycling stations were demolished as ' not formal ' and channeled into three large recycling markets under the purview of the district commerce department (C. Jin and Liu 2006). A Shunyi model was also promoted as an example of controlling ' low-end ' industry and population. This suburban district was lauded for having spent 50 million yuan in creating eight ' temporary ' recyclable markets to replace migrant recyclers, buyers, and their markets, and for reducing the migrant labor in recycling from 3,000 people to 832. This model also included policies to encourage recycling industries ' preferential recruitment of local natives (J. Li 2011).

Despite state visions for a formal recycling sector, new state-sponsored recycling companies grew slowly. During the Olympics, informal recycling paused due to traffic control, and state media reported citizen complaints over the lack of ' cometo-door ' service promised by new state recycling companies (X. Yang 2008), while also praising these formal companies as responsible ' sweepers ' for the city ' s residents (Shen 2008). In response to overwhelming demand, migrant waste recycling soon resumed, even experiencing cycles of expansion until 2012. More austere state policies followed, however, to double down on the ' informality ' and ' illegality ' of migrant recycling. Despite the market downturn in 2008, the central government canceled the tax breaks offered to recycling (since 2002) in 2009, stating the need to regulate the recycling industry. District and town governments were under pressure to quicken their steps to evacuate low-end industries and populations.

January 2009 marked the enaction of China ' s Circular Economy Promotion Law, which not only stipulates regular assessment of lower level government work on developing circular economy, but also requires that ' waste recycling and trading markets shall comply with the provisions of the state on environmental protection, safety, fire-fighting, etc. ' (Article 37). Further, in 2011, the central government promulgated a Policy Recommendation on building a complete and modern waste recycling system with ' advanced technology and formal

management. ' In 2014, after Xi visited the municipality and raised four functions of Beijing to build it as a world-class, harmonious, and livable city, the municipality, again, began to ' forcefully evacuate non-capital city functions, ' including vacating manufacturing, regional markets, and the regional logistics industry (Sha 2017). Recycling and the many recycling markets again became ' non-capital city functions, ' and migrant recycling laborers were massively evicted thereafter.

During the process of delegitimizing migrant recycling, district governments grew increasingly intolerant of migrant recyclers and their spaces, not only because of the autonomous waste recycling spaces they formed, but also due to the land they occupied, and their deemed visual incompatibility with the aesthetics contributive to attracting investment. Seeing low financial return from mushrooming small migrant recycling businesses, districts demanded rounds of ' regulation, ' which subjected many to displacement and a greater level of surveillance and forced invisibility. For example, in 2004, Chaoyang district, home to a new central business district (CBD) according to the master plan of 2004 through 2020, ordered a ban on more than 200 recycling markets (including properly licensed ones) within the district; the ban was met by complaints from citizens over mounting trash and from rentdependent state recycling company landlords (W. Li and Wang 2004). In an interview, a former state recycling company manager recounted the rationale behind evictions since the late 1990s, when the company was already ordered by the district to build a trading center to round up and ' centralize ' work and living space for properly licensed migrant recyclers or buyers on formally leased land:

It ' s the city or district government that pushes these policies [of driving migrant recyclers] … [The district governor] told me that you should move your company further away to Tongxian County. His thinking is Chaoyang district is planned as Beijing ' s CBD, and land is profitable here. He spoke to all county governments in Chaoyang district, asked how much revenue they each collect from land leasing, and ordered them to evict all small-business renters. (Beijing 2015)

In neighborhoods, migrant recycling faced growing scrutiny and exclusion from increasingly gated communities as privileged urbanities complained about migrant recyclers ' ' invasion ' of their residential space. Urbanites reported the ' illegality ' and ' chaotic, dirty, and noisy ' recycling activities that are ' too close to neighborhood spaces, ' referring to migrant daily work in reducing and shipping out recyclables for the neighborhood. Most migrant recycling was properly registered with the local street office (Luo and Wang 2011). Sanctioned with licensing, the migrants were neither accepted by privileged urbanites nor fully excluded. In response, they adopted a hiding strategy to evade urban management crews performing inspection ' duties ' when urbanites complained.

Citizens hunted down remaining waste spaces in outer suburbs. In one instance (H. Wang 2017), a citizen reported to city news a large open waste recycling market with more than ten years of history in Changping, citing its ' lacking management crew and fire equipment, ' its violation of state restrictions of ' hybrid markets for commerce, production, and living, ' and its blockage of traffic when trucks perform regular duties to load sorted waste from this market. More than 100 small migrant-run recycling businesses operate in an orderly way in this walled, more than sixty-four-acre space, and one migrant said, ' We sort wastes here during the day and sleep here at night. We have families and nowhere else to go. ' Under public pressure, the town government acknowledged that this space should be banned due to its ' low-end ' industry category and blamed ' the lagging of planning ' and migrants returning after a previous round of evictions (H. Wang 2017).

It was under this incomplete exclusion that Dongxiaokou grew to become the largest wasterecycling town (Tao, Tong, and Ferri 2014). Propelled by ' evacuating low-end industries, ' an area of 0.76 square kilometers hosting twenty-eight markets was uprooted, displacing 28,000 migrants (H. Wang 2017), a process taking from November 2011 to 2014, with some migrants still using the vacant land for buying and selling waste until 2019. A vibrant community, including a school for more than 500 migrant children, was dissolved (Figures 3 and 4). The fire in Daxing in 2017 resulted in more evacuations of migrant recyclers in different corners of the city. By 2018, eighty-one out of the eightytwo waste trade markets between the 4th and 5th ring roads were closed on order, to be replaced by up to seventeen new government-planned recyclable material trade centers (Gong 2018). A spontaneous recycling system has since been forced to stay out of sight, with a significant number of migrants exiting recycling or moving to the few more distant villages. By contrast, municipal wastes continue to overflow, and two thirds of China ' s cities were ' besieged by wastes ' by 2017 (Lu and Du 2019).

## Conclusions: From Hidden Back to Hiding and Deepening Exclusion

There is still a lot to recycle as long as we have demolitions. Price is the same. … The state ' s recycling centers will be rented to our migrants. Still depend on us. … It ' s like a relay race, and the chain is still intact. It ' s just becoming a guanxi (social network) game and a hiding game. … Garbage sorting campaign in Shanghai? That ' s

Figure 3 Recycling village in demolition, 2015. Photo by Guo Chen.

<!-- image -->

Figure 4 Recycling village erased, 2019: Bulldozed migrant school and village turned into reserved urban green space, a city leisure park now, with a sign reading ' Garbage dumping is forbidden; violators will be fined 5000 yuan. ' Photo by Guo Chen.

<!-- image -->

temporary. All sorted garbage, once turned into our fellow migrants, get mixed up again. It ' s too costly and [the government] don ' t have enough labor force to work out that system. (Migrant interviewee, Beijing, August 8, 2019)

As one of the first pilot zero-waste cities in China, Shanghai has been applauded for its coordination among bureaucracies, community mobilization, and relative transparency in pushing for waste separations by households and businesses, which has been largely considered a positive example for other Chinese cities to follow by environmental activists and nongovernmental organizations. The collection and management of recyclable wastes in most Chinese cities, however, still depends on informal recyclers and a highly efficient informal recycling network. On one hand, state media lauded anecdotes of second-generation migrants venturing into the ' formal ' sector, and existing migrant labor being absorbed into the formal waste management system. On the other hand, when Shanghai ' s compulsory waste sorting began in 2019, a migrant in Beijing with thirty years of experience in recycling questioned its feasibility and told us, ' No, we don ' t see a net loss of labor; new folks are still coming to the city and entering the recycling business. ' After the demolition of Dongxiaokou, he was lucky to relocate to a new host village that allowed him to keep his yard business alive on and off and in a stealthy way. Although Beijing ' s mandatory household garbage sorting since 2020 has had the most immediate impact on the incomes of ' scavengers ' or waste pickers (Dataway 2020), the recycling labor force in Beijing is still dominated by the ' informal army ' (over 90 percent; Sun 2021). From more than ten villages occupied by Henan migrants with self-organized industrial and residential spaces, to the last waste villages bulldozed, the hidden geography of migrant recycling in urban China still survives, in the form of a massive and highly efficient network of waste pickers, sorters, buyers, shippers, and traders of recyclables involving substantial labor and human, social, and financial capital.

This article contributes to a largely missing critical scholarship on the intersection of China ' s waste geography and migrant exclusion and forges dialogues with waste geographies elsewhere in the Global South. Our work shows waste geography as a product of state sanction and a phenomenon of alternating flexible inclusion and constant exclusion of migrant labor. The article examines the structuration process of China ' s hidden, migrant-run, spontaneous recycling geography, which involves massive labor on the part of migrant waste workers, decades of toiling and entrepreneurship, well-organized communities, their indomitability in coping with waged wars against waste and waste workers as ' out of place ' yet useful, all manipulated through a stateproduced boundary between informal and formal and shifting rhetoric. We argue that unhiding and privileging this geography is critical to understanding how authoritarian urban environmental governance attempts to obfuscate a spontaneous waste geography and, in so doing, perpetuates social injustice and exclusions for migrant citizens in serving other state goals, resonating with critical views on China ' s ascending model of environmental authoritarianism (Y. Li and Shapiro 2020). /H17039

## Acknowledgments

We thank the anonymous reviewers and the Editor, Heejun Chang, for their careful and constructive suggestions to the article. This article is based on and part of long-term research work since 2009. Profound thanks go to the numerous participants and individuals who facilitated our field work over the years and the colleagues who generously provided feedback during different stages of this decade-long project.

## Funding

We thank the National Geographic Society, Michigan State University (HARP and Asian Studies), the Wilson Center, and an earlier NSFDDRI for funding the field work, writings, and scholarly exchanges critical to our longterm project.

## ORCID

Guo Chen 2071-7722

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-

Jia Feng

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0530-7963

## Notes

- 1 The total amount is calculated based on data published at https://www.statista.com/statistics/300385/china-investmentin-environmental-pollution-treatment/.
- 2 Chinese media has popularized that 6 million people depend on waste picking in China, an estimated number originally quoted from a World Bank brief by Medina (2008). A Xinhua report ( ' Army of waste pickers ' 2016) states 2.3 million were informal waste pickers or recyclers in China ' s 664 cities between 1987 and 2006. Linzner and Salhofer (2014) estimated as many as 15 million could work in the informal waste sector, and a later news story ( ' Recycling the used ' 2016) quotes a Ministry of Commerce of the PRC (2015) report that 18 million worked in the entire resource recycling industry in 2013, and that number dropped to 15 million in 2014, although 2 million more became informal waste pickers or recyclers that year.

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

- 3 According to the China Urban and Rural Construction Statistical Yearbook published by the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development of the PRC (MOHURD) at http://www.mohurd.gov.cn/xytj/ tjzljsxytjgb/jstjnj/, 10.1 million tons of trash were collected and transported by the municipality in 2019, an increase from 5.38 million tons in 2006. By contrast, Shanghai ' s municipal collected and transported trash had increased slowly from 6.58 million tons in 2006 to 7.5 million tons in 2019. Beijing ' s number dropped significantly in 2020.
- 4 According to Xinhua ( ' Beijing officials suspended ' 2017), a fire breaking out on 18 November 2017, at an illegally built three-story dorm for migrant rental housing in Xinjiang village, the southern suburb of Beijing, killed nineteen and injured eight. Several top district and township officials and other cadres were suspended. Based on Buckley (2017), this fire led to a widely criticized city drive against migrant neighborhoods and those who worked or lived in buildings deemed ' dangerous or illegal ' in Beijing 2017, evicting tens of thousands of migrants and their businesses shortly before winter that year. This sparked widespread criticism over the state ' s past derogative use of ' low-end ' population to describe migrants; the state denied that the drive targeted ' low-end ' population.
- 5 Based on literature data and estimates, Linzner and Salhofer (2014) further narrowed down the interval to approximately 0.56 percent to 0.93 percent of the urban population or 3.3 to 5.6 million people.
- 6 Pointing out the many discrepancies of underlying methods and definitions used in these estimates from existing literature, based on migrant labor data in the early 2010s, Linzner and Salhofer (2014) estimated 151,900 to 182,280 work as informal waste collectors in Beijing.
- 7 An interdisciplinary field of discard studies has emerged online and united a group of scholars and activists, primarily from North America, around topics of waste, society, and culture over the past ten years.
- 8 According to Chinese scholars such as Tan (1997), migrant villages such as Zhejiang villages were ' cleaned up and rectified ' ( qingli zhengdun ) at least three times during the 1980s and 1990s by the Fengtai district government to control the ' explosive ' increase of migrant population and their concentration in the urban -rural fringe. The term guerrilla war has been used in Chinese journalistic reports and Chinese sociologists ' studies (such as those by Can Tang) since the 1990s.
- 9 Data from a Renewable Resources Work Newsletter by China Resource Recycling Association, republished by Non-ferrous Metals Recycling and Utilization 2006 (8):42 -43.

## Literature Cited

Afon, A. 2012. A survey of operational characteristics, socioeconomic and health effects of scavenging activity in Lagos, Nigeria. Waste Management &amp; Research: The Journal of the International Solid Wastes and Public Cleansing Association 30 (7):664 -71. doi: 10.1177/ 0734242X12444894.

- Ahmed, S. A., and M. Ali. 2004. Partnerships for solid waste management in developing countries: Linking theories to realities. Habitat International 28 (3):467 -79. doi: 10.1016/S0197-3975(03)00044-4.
- Army of waste pickers? No more garbage besieging the city. 2016. Xinhua, November 7. Accessed October 10, 2021. http://www.xinhuanet.com//politics/2016-11/07/ c\_1119860422.htm.
- Beijing Municipal Bureau of Statistics. 2019. The development and change of permanent resident population of Beijing in 2018.
- Beijing officials suspended over fatal fire. 2017. Xinhua, November 29. Accessed July 2, 2021. http://www.xinhuanet.com//english/2017-11/29/c\_136788628.htm.
- Brooks, A. L., S. Wang, and J. R. Jambeck. 2018. The Chinese import ban and its impact on global plastic waste trade. Science Advances 4 (6):eaat0131. doi: 10. 1126/sciadv.aat0131.
- Brownell, E. 2014. Seeing dirt in Dar es Salaam: Sanitation, waste, and citizenship in the postcolonial city. In The arts of citizenship in African cities: Infrastructures and spaces of belonging , ed. M. Diouf and R. Fredericks, 209 -30. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
- Buckley, C. 2017. Why parts of Beijing look like a devastated war zone. The New York Times , November 30. Accessed July 2, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/ 11/30/world/asia/china-beijing-migrants.html?\_ga=2. 42372517.1636101753.1614725528-2040107137. 1612898672.
- Chen, J. Y. 2012. Guilty of indigence: The urban poor in China, 1900 -1953 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
- Chen, L. 2016. History and future of Beijing ' s waste recycling. Green Leaf 2016 (9):52 -57.
- Chen, X., Y. Geng, and T. Fujita. 2010. An overview of municipal solid waste management in China. Waste Management 30 (4):716 -24. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2009. 10.011.
- China Association of Circular Economy. 2021. The State Council issued the guiding opinions on accelerating the establishment and improvement of a green and low carbon circular development economic system (2021-0223). Accessed July 1, 2021. http://en.chinacace.org/ events/view?id=6107.
- China to ban all solid waste imports from day 1, 2021. 2020. Xinhua, December 5. Accessed June 27, 2021. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/2020-12/05/c\_ 139565822.htm.
- Dataway. 2020. A report on scavengers and their interaction with municipal waste recycling management system in the context of compulsory garbage sorting policies. Accessed November 15, 2021. http://www.vankefoundation.org/upload/file/2020-11-10/b2a6931e-8918-4c0bae0b-8ad490c99af1.pdf.
- Dey, S. 2018. The circular economy of Dharavi: Making building materials from waste . Master ' s thesis, Pennsylvania State University.
- Dias, S. M. 2016. Waste pickers and cities. Environment and Urbanization 28 (2):375 -90. doi: 10.1177/ 0956247816657302.

- Ding, K., and Z. Li. 2011. Environmental protection: From ' guerillas ' to industrialization. Beijing Business Today , June 30:Section 005.
- Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and danger: An analysis of the concepts of pollution and taboo . New York: Praeger.
- The era of compulsory garbage sorting begins. 2019. China Daily . Accessed May 17, 2021. https://www.chinadaily. com.cn/a/201906/24/WS5d10650ba3103dbf14329e23. html.
- Fang, I. 2019. Yearning for care? Rethinking paternalism in contemporary China from migrant workers perspective. International Journal of Business Anthropology 9 (2): 51 -63.
- Feng, J. 2016. Migrant livelihood and business in urban China: The case of Henancun and recycling in Beijing . PhD dissertation, Michigan State University.
- Feng, X. 2004. Selection of the population management system in the urban -rural fringe area of Beijing city. Social Science of Beijing 2004 (1):85 -92.
- Fredericks, R. 2018. Garbage citizenship: Vital infrastructures of labor in Dakar, Senegal . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Fu, C. 1998. Where should 80 million migrant workers go? Renmin Luntan [People ' s Tribune] 1998 (4):28 -31.
- Gong, X. 2018. Waste recycling driving the integration of recycling and sanitation systems. China Science Daily , September 9:Section 005.
- Harvey, D. 2006. Paris, capital of modernity . London and New York: Routledge.
- Hetherington, K. 2004. Secondhandedness: Consumption, disposal, and absent presence. Environment and Planning D: Society and Space 22 (1):157 -73. doi: 10.1068/d315t.
- Honig, E. 1992a. Creating Chinese ethnicity: Subei people in Shanghai, 1850 -1980. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
- Honig, E. 1992b. Native-place hierarchy and labor market segmentation: The case of Subei people in Shanghai. In Chinese history in economic perspective , ed. T. G. Rawski and L. M. Li, 271 -94. Berkeley: University of California Press.
- Honig, E. 1996. Native place and the making of Chinese ethnicity. In Remapping China: Fissures in historical terrain , ed. G. Hershatter, E. Honig, J. N. Lipman, and R. Stross, 143 -55. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
- Hoornweg, D., P. Lam, and M. Chaudhry. 2005. Waste management in China: Issues and recommendations. Urban Development Working Papers No. 9, East Asia Infrastructure Department, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- Hu, A., and L. Zhao. 2006. Informal employment and informal economy in the economic transformation in the process of urbanization in China (1990 -2004). Journal of Tsinghua University (Philosophy and Social Sciences) 21 (3):111 -19.
- Huang, Q., Q. Wang, L. Dong, B. Xi, and B. Zhou. 2006. The current situation of solid waste management in China. Journal of Material Cycles and Waste Management 8 (1):63 -69. doi: 10.1007/s10163-005-0137-2.
- Jin, C., and Y. Liu. 2006. Army of scavengers: The pain of the city. Beijing Jishi [Beijing Document] 2006 (4): 44 -51.
- Jin, W. 2001. Floating peasants: Living on the edge of the city. Democracy &amp; Science 2001 (2):27 -31.
- Li, J. 2011. Beijing ' s population regulation: Low-end labor may be directed to satellite cities in Hebei. The Economic Observer , January 21.
- Li, K. 2020. Aifenlei (love trash sorting) service to your door. Xinhua Daily Telegraph , July 13.
- Li, W., and X. Wang. 2004. If recycling markets are banned, how do we reduce wastes? Market Daily , December 14.
- Li, Y. 2003. Urban waste scavengers. China Today 2003 (5): 54 -57.
- Li, Y. 2007. Olympic battle county takes action. Invest Beijing 2007 (5):32 -34.
- Li, Y., and J. Shapiro. 2020. China goes green: Coercive environmentalism for a troubled planet . Cambridge, UK: Polity.
- Li, Z., L. Yang, X. Qu, and Y. Sui. 2009. Municipal solid waste management in Beijing city. Waste Management 29 (9):2596 -99.
- Liboiron, M. 2012. Tactics of waste, dirt and discard in the occupy movement. Social Movement Studies 11 (3 -4): 393 -401. doi: 10.1080/14742837.2012.704178.
- Linzner, R., and S. Salhofer. 2014. Municipal solid waste recycling and the significance of informal sector in urban China. Waste Management &amp; Research: The Journal of the International Solid Wastes and Public Cleansing Association 32 (9):896 -907. doi: 10.1177/ 0734242X14543555.
- Lu, S., and H. Du. 2019. Implementation path and suggestions for ' two networks integration ' of municipal solid waste treatment. Scientific Development 2019 (10):63 -69.
- Luo, Q., and X. Wang. 2011. 50-meter long hutong turning into an open recycling station. Beijing Daily , September 19.
- Mallapaty, S. 2020. How China could be carbon neutral by mid-century. Nature 586 (7830):482 -83. doi: 10.1038/ d41586-020-02927-9.
- Medina, M. 2000. Scavenger cooperatives in Asia and Latin America. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 31 (1):51 -69. doi: 10.1016/S0921-3449(00)00071-9.
- Medina, M. 2008. The informal recycling sector in developing countries: Organizing waste pickers to enhance their impact (English). Gridlines, No. 44, World Bank Group, Washington, DC. Accessed July 1, 2021. http:// documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/
- [227581468156575228/The-informal-recycling-sectorin-developing-countries-organizing-waste-pickers-toenhance-their-impact.](http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/227581468156575228/The-informal-recycling-sector-in-developing-countries-organizing-waste-pickers-to-enhance-their-impact)
- Ministry of Commerce of the PRC. 2015. The development report of China ' s resource recycling industry 2015. Accessed September 4, 2022. https://huanbao.bjx. com.cn/news/20150706/638381-2.shtml
- Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the PRC (MEE). 2018. Work plan on ' Zero-waste City ' pilot program in China by General Office of the State Council, No. 128. Accessed July 29, 2021. http://www.mee.gov.cn/home/ztbd/2020/wfcsjssdgz/ dcsj/wfcszcwj/201906/P020190606505202335490.pdf.
- Ministry of Ecology and Environment of the PRC (MEE). 2020. 2020 yearly report of solid waste pollution and environment management of large and medium-sized cities in China. Accessed May 19, 2021. https://www.

[mee.gov.cn/ywgz/gtfwyhxpgl/gtfw/202012/ P020201228557295103367.pdf.](https://www.mee.gov.cn/ywgz/gtfwyhxpgl/gtfw/202012/P020201228557295103367.pdf.)

- Minter, A. 2013. Junkyard planet: Travels in the billion-dollar trash trade . New York: Bloomsbury.
- Moore, S. A. 2009. The excess of modernity: Garbage politics in Oaxaca, Mexico. The Professional Geographer 61 (4):426 -37. doi: 10.1080/00330120903143375.
- Moore, S. A. 2012. Garbage matters: Concepts in new geographies of waste. Progress in Human Geography 36 (6):780 -99. doi: 10.1177/0309132512437077.
- Mu, Y. 2004. Walking in the migrant ' villages ' in Beijing. China Society News , June 10:Section 003.
- Olympic urban legislation into the implementation stage. 2006. The Beijing News. Accessed March 23, 2021. https://web.archive.org/web/20171209203852/http:// npc.people.com.cn/GB/14957/53049/4819652.html.
- O ' Neill, K. 2019. Waste . Cambridge, UK: Polity.
- Park, A., Y. Wu, and Y. Du. 2012. Informal employment in urban China: Measurement and implications . Washington, DC: World Bank.
- Quan, Y. 2005. Beijing proposition to curb population expansion. Shenzhou Zazhi [Divineland] 2005 (9):24 -27.
- Recycling the used: From waste to commodity. 2016. Beijing Business Today , October 21:Section A02.
- Reuters. 2021. China aims to re-use 60% of its trash by 2025. Accessed June 30, 2021. https://www.reuters.com/ business/environment/china-aims-re-use-60-its-trashby-2025-2021-05-13/.
- Roberts, N. 2016. To be cared for: The power of conversion and foreignness of belonging in an Indian slum . Oakland: University of California Press.
- Roy, A. 2005. Urban informality: Toward an epistemology of planning. Journal of the American Planning Association 71 (2):147 -58. doi: 10.1080/01944360508976689.
- Samson, M. 2020. Whose frontier is it anyway? Reclaimer ' integration ' and the battle over Johannesburg ' s wastebased commodity frontier. Capitalism Nature Socialism 31 (4):60 -75. doi: 10.1080/10455752.2019.1700538
- Scheinberg, A., D. C. Wilson, and L. Rodic-Wiersma. 2010. Solid waste management in the world ' s cities. London: Earthscan for and on behalf of UN-Habitat.
- Sha, L. 2017. Elevate the four functions to redefine Beijing. The Beijing News . Accessed November 6, 2021. http://www.chinanews.com/cj/2017/06-04/8241445. shtml.
- Sharma, K. 2000. Rediscovering Dharavi: Stories from Asia ' s largest slum . New Delhi, India: Penguin.
- Shen, Y. 2008. Easy order online to get your recyclables picked up at your door. Beijing Daily, July 5.
- Sit, V., and X. Liu. 2014. Beijing: From traditional Capital to the Chinese world city . Beijing: Social Sciences Academic Press.
- Solinger, D. 1999. Contesting citizenship in urban China: Peasant migrants, the state, and the logic of the market . Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
- Solinger, D. 2018. Introduction: State policies, castes, and agency. In Polarized cities: Portraits of the rich and poor in urban China , ed. D. Solinger, 1 -20. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
- Su, B., A. Heshmati, Y. Geng, and X. Yu. 2013. A review of the circular economy in China: Moving from rhetoric
- to implementation. Journal of Cleaner Production 42: 215 -27. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020.
- Sun, Y. 2021. Guerillas occupy over 90 percent of the ' field ' in cardboard recycling in Beijing. Beijing Evening News , July 30. Accessed November 16, 2021. https:// news.bjd.com.cn/deep/2021/07/30/140407t115.html.
- Tan, Z. 1997. Investigation and thoughts about governing migrant population in cities. China Business Administration Research 1997 (2):51 -52.
- Tang, C., and X. Feng. 2000. The stratification of floating population in the Henan village. Sociological Studies 200 (4):72 -85.
- Tang, W., and W. L. Parish. 2000. Chinese urban life under reform: The changing social contract . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
- Tao, D., X. Tong, and C. Ferri. 2014. The production of grey space in rural -urban fringe: A case study of the ' waste village ' in Beijing. Urban Planning International 29 (5):8 -14.
- Tong, X., and D. Tao. 2016. The rise and fall of a ' waste city ' in the construction of an ' urban circular economic system ' : The changing landscape of waste in Beijing. Resources, Conservation and Recycling 107:10 -17. doi: 10. 1016/j.resconrec.2015.12.003.
- Vaidya, P., R. Kumar, and D. Sharma. 2016. Economics and environmental impacts of plastic waste recycling: A case study of Mumbai. The Journal of Solid Waste Technology and Management 42 (4):287 -97. doi: 10.5276/ JSWTM.2016.287.
- Velis, C. A., D. C. Wilson, O. Rocca, S. R. Smith, A. Mavropoulos, and C. R. Cheeseman. 2012. An analytical framework and tool ( ' InteRa ' ) for integrating the informal recycling sector in waste and resource management systems in developing countries. Waste Management &amp; Research: The Journal of the International Solid Wastes and Public Cleansing Association 30 (9, Suppl.):43 -66. doi: 10. 1177/0734242X12454934.
- Wang, C. 2019. Waste recycling depends on civil power. People ' s Weekly 2019 (9):30 -31.
- Wang, H. 2017. The largest waste center withdrew from Changping District. Beijing Daily , March 7.
- Wang, H., S. Liu, L. Sun, and B. Xiang. 1997. Zhejiang village: A unique way for the Chinese peasants to enter the city. Sociological Research 1997 (1):56 -67.
- Wang, H., and Y. Nie. 2001. Municipal solid waste characteristics and management in China. Journal of the Air &amp; Waste Management Association 51 (2):250 -63. doi: 10. 1080/10473289.2001.10464266.
- Wang, J. (Director). 2012. Beijing Besieged by Waste [Documentary]. Icarus Films.
- Wang, J. (Director). 2016. Plastic China [Documentary]. CNEX.
- Wang, J. 2018. Beijing met ' city-besieged-by-garbage. ' Beijing Wenxue [Beijing Literature] 2018 (1):4 -41.
- Weinstein, L. 2014. The durable slum: Dharavi and the right to stay put in globalizing Mumbai . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
- Wen, Z., Y. Xie, M. Chen, and C. D. Dinga. 2021. China ' s plastic import ban increases prospects of environmental impact mitigation of plastic waste trade flow worldwide. Nature Communications 12 (1):425. doi: 10. 1038/s41467-020-20741-9.

- Whitson, R. 2011. Negotiating place and value: Geographies of waste and scavenging in Buenos Aires. Antipode 43 (4):1404 -33. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010. 00791.x.
- Wilson, D. C., A. O. Araba, K. Chinwah, and C. R. Cheeseman. 2009. Building recycling rates through the informal sector. Waste Management 29 (2):629 -35. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2008.06.016.
- Wilson, D. C., L. Rodic, A. Scheinberg, C. A. Velis, and G. Alabaster. 2012. Comparative analysis of solid waste management in 20 cities. Waste Management &amp; Research: The Journal of the International Solid Wastes and Public Cleansing Association 30 (3):237 -54. doi: 10.1177/ 0734242X12437569.
- Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing (WIEGO). 2021a. Waste pickers. Accessed May 18, 2021. https://www.wiego.org/informal-economy/occupational-groups/waste-pickers.
- Women in Informal Employment: Globalizing and Organizing (WIEGO). 2021b. Waste pickers organizing. Accessed July 6, 2021. https://www.wiego.org/ waste-pickers-organizing.
- The World Bank. 2012. What a waste: A global review of solid waste management. Urban Development Series, No. 15, Urban Development &amp; Local Government Unit, World Bank, Washington, DC.
- [World Trade Organization. 2017. Notification. Accessed June 30, 2021. https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/FE\_ Search/FE\_S\_S009-DP.aspx?language=E&amp; CatalogueIdList=237688&amp;CurrentCatalogueIdIndex=0&amp; FullTextHash=371857150&amp;HasEnglishRecord=True&amp; HasFrenchRecord=True&amp;HasSpanishRecord=True.](https://docs.wto.org/dol2fe/Pages/FE_Search/FE_S_S009-DP.aspx?language=E&CatalogueIdList=237688&CurrentCatalogueIdIndex=0&FullTextHash=371857150&HasEnglishRecord=True&HasFrenchRecord=True&HasSpanishRecord=True.)
- Wu, J. 2010. Rural migrant workers and China ' s differential citizenship: A comparative institutional analysis. In One country, two societies: Rural -urban inequality in contemporary China , ed. M. Whyte, 55 -81. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
- Wu, L. 2013. Decentralization and hukou reforms in China. Policy and Society 32 (1):33 -42. doi: 10.1016/j.polsoc.2013.01.002.
- Wu, Z. 1999. Manage environmental pollution and reuse development of recyclable resources. Recyclable Resources Research 1999 (6):2 -6.
- Xia, P. 1998. The employment condition of migrant population in Beijing: An analysis of the 1997 migrant population census in Beijing. Beijing Statistics 9:18.
- Yan, C. 2012. The revelation of Dongxiaoku recycling market: What ' s the future of waste recycling. China Economic Times, July 23.
- Yang, H., M. Ma, J. R. Thompson, and R. J. Flower. 2018. Waste management, informal recycling, environmental
- pollution and public health. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 72 (3):237 -43. doi: 10.1136/jech2016-208597.
- Yang, S., and C. Furedy. 1993. Recovery of wastes for recycling in Beijing. Environmental Conservation 20 (1): 79 -82. doi: 10.1017/S0376892900037280.
- Yang, T., Y. Pan, J. Hu, and Q. Cheng. 1995. Urban villages not on list: Interviews in Beijing ' s migrant population concentration areas. Outlook Weekly 1995 (48): 14 -19.
- Yang, X. 2008. Recyclable door service covers 8 urban districts. Beijing Daily , July 31.
- Yang, Z. 1995. Warning on the sprawl of urban slums. Market and Demographic Analysis 1 (3):19 -22.
- Yu, Q., and H. Xiang. 2019. The bottom truth of Beijing ' s recyclable garbage. Resource Recycling 2019 (9):31 -37.
- Zhang, C. 2018. Governing neoliberal authoritarian citizenship: Theorizing hukou and the changing mobility regime in China. Citizenship Studies 22 (8):855 -81. doi: 10.1080/13621025.2018.1531824.
- Zhou, B., C. Sun, and H. Yi. 2017. Solid waste disposal in Chinese cities: An evaluation of local performance. Sustainability 9 (12):2234. doi: 10.3390/su9122234.
- Zhu, M. 2005. Investigations of urban corners in Beijing . Beijing: Social Science Academic Press.
- Zong, Y. 2020. Learning from community recycling in Xicheng District, Beijing. Accessed April 2, 2021. http:// www.bj.xinhuanet.com/2020-04/17/c\_1125870575.htm.

GUO CHEN is an Associate Professor in the Department of Geography, Environment, and Spatial Sciences &amp; Global Urban Studies Program, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824. E-mail: guochen@msu.edu. Her research interests include poverty, inequality, social and environmental justice, slums, and migrants in the Global South, Asia, and China.

JIA FENG is a Teaching Assistant Professor in the Department of Geography, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV 89557. E-mail: jiaf@unr.edu. His research interests include migration, migrant enclaves, marginality issues, and recycling in urban China.

LIWEN CHEN is the Founder of Zero Waste Village, an environmental nongovernmental organization in China. Email: chenliwen@czwv.org.cn. She has dedicated over ten years of work to waste reduction, recycling, and education in urban and rural China.