## American Geographical Society

Challenges to Family Farming in China

Author(s): Gregory Veeck and Wang Shaohua

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 90, No. 1 (Jan., 2000), pp. 57-82

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/216175 .

Accessed: 08/05/2014 21:22

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## CHALLENGES  TO FAMILY  FARMING  IN CHINA*

## GREGORY  VEECK and WANG SHAOHUA

ABSTRACT. China's  agricultural sector  requires  reforms  to assure  farmers  and  consumers  of fair  prices  while protecting  the environment  and  permitting  sustainable  growth  in the coming years.  The affluent  eastern  province  of Jiangsu  is an  appropriate site  in which  to explore the effects of  agricultural  reforms on rural  households and, in turn, the effects of these households on the environment.  We compare  two surveys  (1987  and 1996),  of 1oo households each, of farmers  in Huaiyin and Huai'an  Counties, Jiangsu  Province.  Indicated  are chronically  low economic returns  on grain,  moderate  returns  for  livestock,  and the highest returns  for vegetables.  Unfortunately,  the production of livestock  and vegetables  requires more farm chemicals,  inorganic  fertilizers,  and placement  of field  plastic-all  of which are associated with  greater environmental problems. Keywords: agriculture,  China, Jiangsu Province,  rural  development.

China's leaders  recall  with ritual  regularity agriculture's place  as  the  very  "foundation"  of the state  economy.  Farmers, in turn,  are  assumed  to be the "pillars" upon which society  rests (Beijing Review 1998;  Li  1998).  This rhetoric, which in 1996  thenPremier  Li  Peng  used  to  evoke  Mao  Tse-tung's rural  strategy dating  from  the  earliest days  of the Chinese Communist Party,  has come to sound hollow in recent  years (Li  P.  1996). In the modern  People's  Republic  of China  (PRC),  where  high incomes are  associated  with  light-industry  or  service-sector jobs  in  urban  places,  the  Confucian  line  that  farmers should  receive  the  utmost  respect  from  all  members  of society requires  a  bit of a  stretch.  In  fact,  in  early  2000 the social  and  cultural  gaps  between farmers  and  city-dwellers  in China  are  greater than  ever,  and  farmers are  being  singled  out as  having  caused  economic  and  environmental  problems  that  are  distinctly beyond their control.

Fiscal  reform  of the farm  sector  and  environmental protection  in China  are  admittedly  complex issues,  often  viewed  in academic  research  from  towering  macropolicy  or national  political  economy  perspectives  (Sicular 1988, 1991;  Perkins 1991; Hsueh,  Sung, and Yu 1993;  Smil 1993;  Brown 1995;  Huang 1998). These clinically removed approaches  are  appropriate  and necessary, but the picture  they paint  is incomplete.  Two  surveys  of ioo households  we conducted  ten  years  apart  in Huaiyin and Huai'an  Counties, in the most important  agricultural  region of northern  Jiangsu  Province,  help to fill  in the  gaps  (Figure  1).  The  first  survey  was  carried  out in September  and October  1987.  The follow-up,  with a  30 percent  overlap  in the sam-

* We are  grateful  for  the support of Nanjing  Agricultural  University, the National  Geographic  Society,  the Committee for Scholarly  Communication with China, and the Fulbright-Hays  Faculty  Research  Program.  We also thank  the farmers  and officials  of Huaiyin  and Huai'an  who participated  in our study.  Marylee  Eggart  of the Department of Geography  and Anthropology at Louisiana  State University  was kind enough to provide graphic salvation. We dedicate this article to our friend and mentor Zhang Xigu, professor of agricultural  ecology at Nanjing Agricultural  University.

*fi DR.  VEECK is an associate  professor  of geography  at Western  Michigan  University,  Kalamazoo, Michigan 49008-5053. DR.  WANG  is  a professor  of  agronomy at Nanjing Agricultural  University, Nanjing,  Jiangsu  Province,  People's  Republic  of China.

F1G. 1—-Huaiyin and Huai'an Counties, Jiangsu Province, China. (Cartography by Marylee Eggart, Louisiana State University)

<!-- image -->

These economicn

and  euinvirounmienta changesu

challneng

China

's(C

entirepyb

Magriclturalart sector.  With  this  research, we seek  to  place  in a  specific  local  context  the  broader  debates  on national  food  supply, the  efficacy  of current pricing  and  marketing policies, and potential  environmental  problems.  To  understand  these  complex  issues  more fully,  we return  to the farm,  where  production  decisions are made one plot, one yuan,  or one hour at  a  time.  The  farmers in our  samples  cannot  change  the  broader and  inaccessible  policies  related  to interest  rates, prices,  land  tenure,  land  use,  or  environmental  protection.  They  instead  respond,  and  quickly, to fresh  commercial  opportunities  and  new  prices.  Each  season  they  can  change  what  they  grow,  how  they grow it, where  they  sell it, and  to whom they  sell it. These economic and environmental changes challenge China's entire agricultural

How,  then,  have  family  farm  strategies  and  agricultural investments  changed  in the past  decade  of reform? Are  matters  better  or  worse?  Secondarily, but related  to the first  set of financial  matters,  are  environment-related issues.  Do farmers  in Ji-

angsu  contribute  to environmental  problems? If  so,  how  do  these  families  pollute  or cause  environmental  damage? Are  the  farmers aware  of these  issues?  What  mutually beneficial  adjustments  might  be made  to meet the needs  of the state,  of urban  consumers,  and of farmers?

## AGRICULTURE DURING  CHINAS 1980-PLUS REFORM  ERA

Farming  as  a  way  of  life  has  never  been  easy  in  China,  and  the  post-Mao  reform era  is certainly  no exception.  Given  the  success  of  the  agricultural sector  during  the  reform era,  however,  it seems  reasonable to ascribe  the  gratitude of city  people  to  the  efforts of China's 330 million  farmers. In  terms  of  gross  production,  early-reform-era farmers  were  fantastically successful.  Grain  output  increased by  about  200  million  metric tons to 505  million metric  tons from  1978 to 1996,  two  decades  during  which  the  extent  of arable land  actually declined  (Brown  1995; ZTN  1997). Total gross  output  value from field  agriculture  increased  twelvefold,  reflecting  the diversification  and commercialization  of  an  agricultural sector  encouraged by  reform  programs  (Nong  1995; ZTN  1997,369). Regularly overlooked  is  the  role  of  countless  state-supported farm  extension  agents  and  researchers who have  educated  farmers and  promoted  newvarieties, new products, and new techniques. This educational effort, coupled with changes  in political  and  economic  conditions,  has  transformed the rural  workforce and the rural  landscape.  It has also provided  China's  dietary  table  with unprecedented volume and variety:  not only more grain  but also more fruits,  more vegetables,  more  eggs,  more  dairy  products,  more  aquacultural products,  and,  above  all, more meat.

As China's  agricultural  sector has changed,  so have the producers.  In twenty years,  farmers have  faced  novel  problems  and  challenges. The  agricultural landscape has been vigorously  altered  by these  policy and  programmatic shifts.  For  example, land sown to vegetables  increased  from  3.2 million hectares  in 1979 to  11.29 million hectares  in 1997.  Farm  households now look to urban  consumers,  rather  than to state  grain  markets, for  profits  (Leeming 1994;  ZTN  1998,385).  Since 1991  the  PRC  has maintained  a commanding  lead over  the United  States  as first  among  countries  in production of  meat: In  1997  China  produced 51,521,000  metric tons  (ZTN  1998,386). This is an unimaginable  amount of meat, especially  when compared  with a total production one-sixth as  large in  1978,  at  8,563,000 metric tons  (ZTN  1984,160).  China's  farmers  accounted for more than one-quarter  (25.13 percent) of total global meat  production (ZTN  1997,390,  837).  Household-owned hog-feeding lots  with  hogs numbering in the hundreds are now common throughout East and Southeast China.  Minuscule  when  compared  with  those  found  in the  United  States  (Hart  1997) but large  in historical  terms,  such  feeder  operations  are  visible  manifestations  of a specialization  in family  farming  that  did not exist  in the early  reform  era.

Despite this success,  farmers  are  frustrated-indeed,  angry.  Throughout  the reform era,  farmers  have  put more  products  of better  quality  on the tables  of an  everincreasing  Chinese  urban  population,  but they  have  little  to show for  their  efforts. Since  1978, farm  households  have  become reluctant  to grow  grain,  which offers  the

lowest  returns  on labor  and  investment.  In  the  early 2000S, however,  the  bottom  has fallen  out of the meat and vegetable  markets  that  held such promise  three  or four years  ago.  Farmers  maintain  that the low prices  paid  by the government  for grain (once again  a government  monopoly) and  the higher  fees  and  rents  they  must pay for  land  where  they  can  produce  other  crops  represent  "hidden" subsidies  that  they have borne for far  too long. Current  issues  of greatest  concern  to farmers  revolve around  farm  economics:  the  high  price  of inputs;  low  prices  for  grain,  oils,  and  cotton; and the rampant  practice  of requiring  local management  fees and usufruct charges.  They  want  unfettered  and  reliable access  to markets for  all  of  their  products all of the time.

Moreover,  farmers in China-like their  counterparts elsewhere-are  exposed  to a considerable  range  of natural  hazards, including  floods,  droughts,  locust  and  grasshopper  plagues,  salinization,  and  landslides.  Droughts  and  floods  occur  somewhere in  China  every  year, and  they  confound  planners  and  projections while  causing  great personal hardship  (Sun 1988;  NBBB 1996;  Liu, Zhang, and Wan 1997). The effects of natural  disasters  on local farm  economies  cannot  be overlooked,  but, as  Yak-yeow Kueh  recently  argued  in his study  of agricultural instability  in China  from 1931 to 1991, annual  fluctuations  in  China's grain  production  are  as  much  the  result  of  policy as of environmental  factors (Teiwes and Sun 1993;  Kueh 1995, Kung 1995). Not  the least  of the  policy-related  problems  are  those  associated with pricing  and  distribution systems.  It  was  the  reform  of these  that  Prime  Minister  Zhu  Rongji,  speaking  in July  1998,  called  the  most important  work  that  the  government  could  undertake for the agricultural sector  (Li  1998).

The  hardships  of farming  caused  by  nature  and  politics  have  not changed, yet  in recent  years  urban  consumers  have  grown  less  sympathetic  to the  plight  of farmers as urban  economic problems  have  mounted.  City-dwellers would remind  farmers that farm  families  pay  minimal  rent,  shipping,  and  storage  costs  for  grain  and  that the state  has spent considerable  sums  of money during  the reform  era  on research and development,  infrastructure, and other  investments  that  have  measurably  improved  the  lives  of rural folk.  The  air  is  clean  (if  the  water  is  not),  housing  is  relatively spacious  (if rustic),  and  farmers can  grow  their  own  food.  Most  of the  basic  needs  of farmers  are  relatively immune to the  inflationary cycles  (or  recessions)  and  fiscal  reforms that frighten  most urban  Chinese.

Furthermore, as  in  the  United  States,  urban  consumers  in China  hope that  their food is safe  but have  little faith  that  this is always  the case.  Stories  of pollution  and poisonings  due  to abuses  of farm  and  agroprocessing chemicals  are  common countrywide.  Perhaps,  with the remarkable increases  in the use of farm  chemicals  and pesticides,  there  really  are  more problems,  more tragedies,  and so, more indignation. Or perhaps  people just feel more comfortable  about expressing  their complaints  now.  Although  it may  not be completely  clear  why,  it is certain  that  public demands for safe  and sustainable  agriculture are  mounting.

These  gaps  in concerns  and  perceptions  seem  important.  Urban  consumers  are beginning  to realize  that  the  great  accomplishments of the  agricultural sector  dur-

ing the reform  era  have  come at  a cost  to the  environment  and  the national  budget. These  issues  have  gained  the attention  of a  previously  indifferent public,  and  farmers,  once the darlings  of the revolution,  find  themselves  with fewer  and fewer  supporters-in  government  and out.

The severe  floods of the summer of 1998 that killed-officially-3,656  persons and destroyed  an estimated  u.s.$3o  billion  worth of crops  and  property  have  been charged  in part  to excessive  lumbering  and  the cultivation  of unconsolidated  slope land in the upper reaches  of China's  major  rivers  and  their  tributaries  (Li  and  Yin 1998, 1;  Rong  1998). Not alone  are  government  officials  in  Beijing who want  justice  in this  cause  celebre.  Millions  of ordinary  people  who spend  summers  living  on levees under the most dangerous  of conditions also want answers.  How should farmers protect  the environment?  How can such  disasters  be prevented? Who is to be punished when such events occur?

In a sense,  the urgency  that  the 1998 floods  brought  to the environmental  concerns  of China's government  and  people  has  a  counterpart in  the  financial crisis  that is  concurrently  affecting  all  of the  western  Pacific nations.  As  the  economies  of East and  Southeast  Asia  shrink  in  a  regional  recession, China  has  bravely held  the  line  and kept  the renminbi  near  precrisis  parity  with the U.S.  dollar. This  is costly,  and  it  has resulted  in what  might be called  budgetary  soul searching  in other  areas  that  claim state  resources. During  the  Eighth  Five-Year Plan  (1991-1995),  China's total  expenditure  on agriculture was  reported  to  be  u.s.$30.24  billion,  accounting  for  9.89  percent of its  budget  for  the  period (Li  1998). This  includes  no government  loan programs, environmental  crisis  support,  emergency  relief  grain  and  aid  money,  infrastructure investment,  educational  programs,  or public  health  expenditures.  Even  excluding these other  expenditures,  lo percent  of a  budget  is a  great  deal  to spend  on a  system that,  from the perspective  of China's urban  consumers,  is awash  in grain.

Looking  back,  it seems odd that international  scrutiny  of China's  agricultural sector  concentrated  on grain  supply  and  long-term  global  food security  (Simpson, Xu,  and  Miyazaki  1994;  Zhong  1994;  Brown  1995;  Tyler 1996). Grain  shortages,  from the Chinese perspective,  are  but reflections  of age-old  problems  such as environmental degradation,  loss of arable  land, pricing,  and distribution  (Johnson  1994; Rozelle,  Veeck,  and Huang  1997;  Huang  1998). Rather  to the chagrin  of American, Canadian,  and Argentine farmers,  China has ample grain. China's  international purchases  of grain  in 1996 declined  by  42  percent  compared with  1995, and  they  have continued to drop.  In fact,  China  is actively  seeking  export  markets  for  wheat  and rice  in order  to relieve  chronic  storage  problems  (Smith  1999).  All  is  connected.  U.S. domestic prices  for corn and wheat  in November  1998 were  at  eleven-year  lows, in large part due to significantly  lower sales to China and Japan.  So, although food shortages  may well develop  down the road,  conditions at present  are  fairly  stable; consumers  in China,  as in all  nations,  tend to have  short  memories.

Most agricultural  experts  in China,  however,  realize  that  the farm  sector  is at a crossroads:  Beijing  must decide  how to address  farm  pricing  issues  and farm  marketing  policies  and  must  settle  on  environmental protection  strategies if  the  remark-

able  increases  in productivity of the  early  reform  era  are  ever  to  be seen  again  (Kueh 1995; Huang  1998).  Reforms  of pricing  and  marketing could  streamline  China's food system,  increasing  farm  returns  while reducing  government  subsidies  and corruption (Smith 1999).  Environmental  enforcement  and policy reforms  are  needed for safe  and sufficient  food supplies.

China's  "economics" of agriculture await  overhaul.  It  is no stretch  to argue  that the state  is  spending  too much  money  and  that  the  farmers are  receiving too little  of it. Not  surprisingly,  the consensus is: Deal with the problems,  or China's  foodproduction  system  will  collapse.  Everyone with  any  sense  in  China  knows  that  problems with prices,  subsidies,  and  marketing  must  be addressed. The murkier  issue  is exactly  how to solve  them  without bankrupting  the  government,  driving  droves  of China's  farmers  from  the land,  or sacking  the environment.

## HOUSEHOLD  SURVEYS IN JIANGSU PROVINCE

We selected  northern  Jiangsu  Province  for our case  study  for a variety  of reasons. First,  the province  was one of the earliest  to introduce  rural  reforms  in the early 1980s. During  our  first  survey, in  1987, the  entire  province  had  been  operating  under reform  policies for at  least  four  years.

Jiangsu  is a highly productive  agricultural province  with rich endowments  of prime,  well-watered  alluvial  land.  After  decades  of water-management projects  on the  Huai  River  and  Hongze  Lake, flooding  is  much  less  often  a  problem  than  it  was  in the  past,  and  canal  systems  (equally important  for  irrigation and  for  transportation) are  excellent  throughout  most of the province.  Except  for  minor  local issues  of soil quality  and  drainage,  environmental  conditions  seldom  affect  crop-selection  decisions.

At the same  time, elevated  yields  associated  with high-quality  land  throughout the region  mean  that  capital  is  usually  available for  farm  chemicals, field  plastic,  and other modern inputs. These products,  in conjunction  with inorganic fertilizers, have  made  possible  rapid  increases in output  during  the  past  two  decades. They  also bring  environmental  problems,  the  most  significant  of  which  is  pollution  from  field runoff. Residual pesticide on produce and the growing volume of plastic film plowed into the soil are  other  concerns  that  our respondents  cited  frequently.

Another factor  that makes  Jiangsu  an excellent  location for research  is the increasingly  significant  commercial  bond  between  the  advanced southern  third  of the province  (Sunan)  and  the  poorer  northern  portion  (Subei),  an  important  and  welldeveloped aspect of what is representative of China's  emerging  "new"  integrated farm  economy.  Long-distance  commercial  relationships  in agriculture are  becoming more and more common throughout  China.  They  diversify  the rural  economy and  thus  improve  the  quality  of  life  for  farmers  in  prosperous areas. This  geographical aspect-larger markets  for  a more  diverse  group  of products  that  can  be sold at increasingly  distant  places-is  often overlooked  by  studies  outside  geography. The reduction in the "time-space continuum'"  brought about by significantly  better transportation  systems  and  capital  from  distant  markets, is  crucial  to  the  farmers in

our sample.  Admittedly,  the commercialization that  has  played  such  a  major  role  in Jiangsu's success  remains  a  distant  goal  for  farmers  in the  interior  provinces.  Farmers  in  less-advanced  areas  have  seen  onlyvery  limited  improvements in  the  quality  of their  lives  since the early  1980S  (Lin,  Cai,  and  Li  1996,  219-220).

Jiangsu,  however,  is a vanguard  province,  and what has happened there  will spread  to other  places.  Although  not ranked  first  in  any  single  measure  of  economic activity-total value  of exports  or  gross  value  of industrial  output,  for  example-Jiangsu is often considered China's  "richest" province thanks to sustained strong performance  in numerous  economic  areas (Cartier 1995;  JTN 1995). Differences between the Jiangsu  counties north and south of the Yangtze River  are  significant  in our study because they have led to distinct development  strategies  and histories, creating  what may easily  be thought of as the province's  "core" and "periphery."

## SOUTHERN JIANGSU

For  much  of China's history  southern  Jiangsu, or  Sunan, has  been  an  important  agricultural  region (Eberhard 1977).  At one time it constituted  a  significant  portion of the historic Chinese granary,  Jiangnan,  which also included the fertile plains of northern  Zhejiang  Province  and  extended  south  to  Hangzhou.  The  agricultural surplus generated  by Sunan's  farmers  earned  the southern  third  of Jiangsu  the name "Land  of Fish  and Rice"  (Zhou 1992).  The name underscores  the renowned  longterm stability  of southern  Jiangsu,  an agricultural production  that  has  long distinguished it from the poorer, northern portions of the province (Li  R.  X. 1996,13-15).

Southern Jiangsu has changed radically  since reforms were instituted, and township-village  light industrial  manufacturing  now accounts  for the bulk of the region's output  value (Fan 1995;  Marton 1995). The path to prosperity is paved with proceeds from the production of myriad  items, including  computer  components (CD-ROMs and hard  drives),  electric  fans,  bicycles,  automobiles,  refrigerators, and washing machines. Remarkably, the people of the land of rice  and fish must now import food, as their standard  of living  has skyrocketed  on the strength  of the industrial and commercial sectors and as their numbers  have risen in accord  with stepped-up demands for labor. Foodstuffs for Sunan are increasingly  imported from the northern two-thirds of the province  or from  beyond its borders.

Sunan's  growth  has  had  a  cascading  effect  on the  household  economy  of the Subei  farmers  in  our  sample.  Since  the  early  1980S,  rapid  growth  in  purchasing power  of Sunan  consumers  has  spurred  the  agricultural transformation of  the  poorer  north.

## NORTHERN JIANGSU

The northern two-thirds of the province,  or Subei,  which includes Huaiyin and Huai'an  Counties,  was historically  plagued  by natural  disasters  and renowned  for great poverty  (Cheng  and Lu 1984;  Rozelle and Jiang 1995, 60-63).  Although  it lags behind Sunan in economic development,  Subei  has made great  strides  since 1949, particularly since  1985, when  provincial  leaders began  to  invest  in  transportation and infrastructure  (FBIS  1982, 81-86).

The investments in Subei infrastructure  reflect not provincial  largess  but a changed  role of the north in long-term  provincial  interests.  As Sunan  has  increasingly  committed  effort  and  resources to industrial  production,  losses  of arable  land and a  shift  of comparative  advantage to nonfarm  activities  have  resulted in the  stagnation of grain  production  since the late 1980s. Provincial  shortfalls  vis-a-vis nationally generated production "targets"  cause tensions between the provincial government  and  Beijing.  Jiangsu's  olution  has  been  to shift  tax  revenues  from  rural industries  located throughout  the province  to finance  improvements  in railroads, roads,  irrigation  systems,  and grain-handling  and -storage  facilities  in Subei,  thus aiding  production  in the north.

## CONTEMPORARY AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS

Huaiyin  and  Huai'an  Counties  are  part  of a  temperate subhumid  region  in  which  the amount of rainfall  is  fairly  limited  and  largely  concentrated  in the  summer  months. The frost-free  period  varies  considerably from  year  to year;  growing  seasons  range from 220 to 240 days (FBIS 1982,22).  Winter crops include wheat, barley,  and rape.

In  most years,  precipitation falls  30  percent  or  more  short  of crop  requirements (FBIS  1982,33). Because  of this  variability, the  expansion  of irrigated land  and  potentially  irrigated  land (land  irrigable during  an  emergency)  has  had  a dramatic  effect on the  stability  of production.  Although  natural  disasters such  as  the  drought  of  1997 and the floods of 1998  affect  production  to some degree,  prudent  attention  to agricultural  infrastructure in the province  during  the past  thirteen  years  has  mitigated these disasters  to a much greater  extent than in less-developed  regions  of China, which lack the capital  required  for  environmental  protection.

During  the  spring  and  summer,  rice,  soybeans, corn,  cotton,  and  peanuts  are  still common field  crops.  New  summer  crops  gained  importance  in  the  l99os, influenced by more distant  markets  and  cash-laden  consumers.  Increased  areas  sown to vegetables  and  melons  are  particularly striking,  but  nontraditional crops  such  as  cane  for baskets,  spearmint,  ramie,  flowers  (daylilies  and  several  types  of chrysanthemums), and seasonings  have  also  grown  in popularity. Sweet  potato,  once  a  major  crop,  has all  but disappeared  from  our survey  area.  In times past,  the poorest  households  of Huaiyin  and  Huai'an  survived  almost  exclusively on sweet  potato;  now it is  planted sparingly  and  used only  for  fodder  or  dried  and  "chipped" by  factories  for  processing into  industrial  starch (Gitomer  1996).

Agricultural land  use  in Subei  has  shifted  from  an  almost  total  concentration  on grain  production  to mixed  systems  that  include  the  commercial production  of  vegetables  and  melons.  Higher-income  urban  consumers have  financed  this  transformation, but the provision of technical  support and expertise  by extension agents  is important.  Foremost  in this technical  revolution  is affordable greenhouse  technology. In 1996 a typical greenhouse  cost about U.S.$2,715 per hectare of  coverage. Greenhouses  are  usually  crafted  of various  grades  of bamboo splints,  then draped with plastic  sheeting;  both the  bamboo and  the  plastic  generally hold up for  two or three  years.  Greenhouses  may  be of either  single  or double  construction,  with the

FIG. 2-A "double  greenhouse"  in Huaiyin  County,  Jiangsu  Province.  The double layer  of plastic traps daytime  radiation  and allows the production  of spinach  and other  greens  in January  despite freezing  evening temperatures.  (Photograph  by Gregory  Veeck,  January1i996)

<!-- image -->

more expensive double ones-covered  with woven mats each evening-used  for growing  vegetables  throughout  all  but  the  months  of  January and  February  (Figure 2).  Understandably, only  the more  valuable  cash  crops-melons, vegetables,  mushrooms, or  flowers-justify the use of  greenhouses.  Such  investment  was  simply  not possible  in 1987,  not  only  because  of  capital  constraints but  also  due  to a  lack  of construction materials,  transportation, and  marketing  channels  that  now link farmers to consumers in the cities.

In  many  ways,  plastic  is also  at the heart  of the environmental  issues  related  to crop  production  in  Subei.  Plastic  sheeting,  ranging from  1-2  mils  thick  for  weed  control  to 6 mils  thick  for  greenhouses, is  an  important  diagnostic  of economic  change. Field  plastic  for  weed  and  moisture  control  was  not available in  1987;  nor  were  there any privately  owned greenhouses  among  our  sample  households  that  year.

In  sharp  contrast,  by  1996  almost  half  (47)  of  the  ioo farmers in our  Huai'an  survey had  built some form  of  greenhouse  within  the  past  two  years.  Farms  in  Huaiyin were  required  to  grow  grain  on most of their  land,  so  ownership  there  was  lower  (22 of ioo farmers).  However, virtually  all  farmers from  both counties  who  grew  corn  or soybeans  also used 1-2  Mil  field  plastic  after  tillage  but  before  planting,  in order  to control  weeds,  retain  moisture,  and  raise  early-spring soil  temperatures. The  plastic is  put  down  by  hand,  and  the  edges  are  covered  with  soil  to  keep  it  in  place.  Holding radiant  heat  at  night  and  raising  soil  temperatures by  day  helps  assure early,  uniform

germination and full-season weed control. Unfortunately,  this very thin plastic quickly  breaks  down  and  cannot  be  used  more  than  once,  even  by  the  parsimonious farmers  of Subei.  Each  season,  then,  what  can  be  pulled  up  easily  is  removed, but  the rest is plowed into the ground.  Natural  soil processes  are  disrupted  by these unwanted  and  somewhat  randomly  distributed  subsurface barriers until,  after  plowing for  four  or  five  years,  they  break  down  into  shreds.  Long-term impacts  of this  extensive  use  of  plastic  are  little  evaluated locally;  but  farmers recognize  a  potential  for  future problems, as power tillers must be stopped regularly  so that plastic can be removed  from  their  tines.  Although  biodegradable plastic  film  is available,  farmers complain that, given the chronically  low prices  for coarse  grains,  use of the more costly,  "environmentally friendly" plastic  is economically  unrealistic.

The thin plastic  reduces  drainage  and  forms  barriers to roots  and  soil  nutrients. Farmers  do report  using  fewer  herbicides and  pesticides  for  land  enclosed  in  temporary  greenhouses  that rely  on thicker  plastics.  Presumably, this means that runoff from  these  fields  contains  significantly lower  levels  of farm  chemicals  and  that  vegetables  grown  in  this  fashion  have  lower  levels  of  residual chemicals  on their  surfaces.

Farmers  express  considerable  interest  in organic  vegetables  that will certainly net higher  prices,  but they  face  a credibility  gap  with urban  consumers.  This is not unreasonable.  Jiangsu  Province  is  the  site  of two  research centers  for  "green agriculture":  One is at  Nanjing  Agricultural University; the other  is a  state-funded  experiment station near  Jiangyan  City,  much closer  to Huaiyin.  Because  of this research center,  Jiangyan City  and Dongtai City  lead  the Subei  counties  in organic  agriculture.  They are closer to Jiangsu's southern cities and to Shanghai  and have lower transportation  costs  and  fresher vegetables.  Researchers at  all  locations  told  us  they believe  that a  very  profitable  niche  exists  for  organic  vegetables  but that standards and  certifications  are  not  yet  sufficiently established  to assure  consumers' trust.  Regardless  of pollution  problems  associated with  the  plastic,  its  use  will  certainly be  required  if an organic  produce  industry  is to develop  in Jiangsu.

Between 1981 and  1997 the  area sown  to  vegetables in  Jiangsu increased almost sevenfold,  to 619,300 hectares  (ZTN 1998, 403). For  a similar  time period, the area sown to melons increased  almost  fivefold  (JN  1996, 193-196). Growth  in vegetableand  melon-sown areas  has  come  at  the  expense  of the  area  sown  to  grain.  In  1981,  the last  year  before  the reforms  were  introduced  throughout  Jiangsu, grain  crops  were sown to more  than  75  percent  of the  province's land.  By  1996 this  share  had  declined to  just  under  68 percent (ZTN 1997,380), So the  amount  of  plastic  entering  the  system is growing  rapidly. The production  of grain  is not increasing  either.  The 1984  gross production  for  all  grains  was  33.53 million  metric  tons.  This  increased only  to 34.47 million metric  tons in 1996 (JTN  1997,  191).

These  provincewide  downward  or  stagnating trends  in  sown  area  and  output  for grain  are  reflected  in Huaiyin  and  Huai'an Counties.  Sown  area  for  all  types  of  grain in Huaiyin  declined  by  12  percent  from  1985  to 1994, with an associated  6 percent drop  in  gross  output.  Both  production  and  sown  area  in  Huai'an  decreased by  4 percent during  the same  period (JN  1996, 511).

The decline in the importance  of grain  sales  in the rural  economy has also resulted  in interesting  changes  in  the  technologies  that  our  respondents use.  Most  surprising is the virtual disappearance  of male-sterile  hybrid  rice that was once the hallmark  of Chinese technological  advances  in agriculture.  In 1987,  85  percent of households in our  samples  planted  hybrid  rice;  in 1996,  none did.  The  reasons  farmers  gave  for  this  change  were  refreshingly straightforward: They,  along  with  virtually

FIG.  3-Cropping  systems  in Huaiyin  and Huai'an  Counties,  Jiangsu  Province,  China.  Source: Calculated  by the authors  from their sample  surveys.

<!-- image -->

all  other  consumers,  dislike  eating  hybrid  rice  and  complain  of a  dry  or  "waxy" taste even when the rice is cooked  properly.

As the crops  grown  by  the  farm  households  in our  sample  changed  from  1987 to 1996, so did the multiple-cropping  systems used to produce them. Only 7 of the 255 fields  included  in our  1996  surveywere  monocropped.  A double-cropping  system  of winter wheat-single-season rice  was the most common in 1987,  accounting  for 49 percent  of all  fields  sown  by  our  loo-household sample.  As  of 1996  this  share  had  declined  to just  under  30  percent  (Figure  3).  In all,  the number  of cropping  systemscounting vegetables  of any type as one system-increased from fifteen in 1987  to twenty-four  in 1996.  Most  striking  was  the overall  increase  in vegetable-only  cropping  systems  and  mixed  winter  crop  (wheat,  rape)-vegetable systems.  Table  I  lists  all of the  cropping  systems  used  by  the  farmers in  our  1996  sample  with  the  exception  of intensive  vegetable  rotations  used  in kitchen  gardens, which  we did not survey.  Just under  30  percent  of surveyed  fields  were  devoted  to  vegetable production  for  at  least half of the annual  growing  season (Systems  2,  3,  4, 7,  11,  and 24).

Absolute field size declined as the total number of cropping  systems  used per household increased.  The  total  number  of plots  sown  by  the ioo households  in each sample  almost  doubled,  from 133  in 1987 to 255 in 1996. The amount  of land  con-

TABLE I-CROPPING SYSTEMS USED IN  HUAIYIN AND  HUAI'AN COUNTIES, JIANGSU PROVINCE, CHINA, 1996

| CROP SYSTEM   | CROP SYSTEM                     | OF            | OF                     |
|---------------|---------------------------------|---------------|------------------------|
| No.           | Name                            | NUMBER FIELDS | PERCENTAGE TOTALFIELDS |
| 1             | Winterwheat-rice                | 76            | 29.69                  |
| 2             | Sweetpotato-vegetables          | 3             | 1.17                   |
| 3             | Rice-vegetables(winterfallow)   | 9             | 3.52                   |
| 4             | Vegetables(3 or 4 cropsperyear) | 30            | 11.72                  |
| 5             | Winterwheat-sweet potato        | 15            | 5.86                   |
| 6             | Winterwheat-corn                | 21            | 8.20                   |
| 7             | Corn-fall vegetables            | 29            | 11.33                  |
| 8             | Winterwheat-peanuts             | 19            | 7.42                   |
| 9             | Winterrape-sweetpotato          | 5             | 1.95                   |
| 10            | Winterrape-corn                 | 8             | 3.51                   |
| 11            | Winterwheat-vegetables          | 5             | 1.95                   |
| 12            | Winterwheat-soybeans            | 5             | 1.99                   |
| 13            | Winterrape-soybeans             | 2             | 0.78                   |
| 14            | Winterrape-peanuts              | 3             | 1.17                   |
| 15            | Corn (monocrop)                 | 2             | 0.78                   |
| 16            | Winterwheatandsweetpotato       | 1             | 0.39                   |
| 17            | Cash-cropshrubsandtrees         | 5             | 1.95                   |
| 18            | Winterrape-rice                 | 9             | 3.52                   |
| 19            | Woodtreesandbasketwillows       | 2             | 0.78                   |
| 20            | Sweetpotato (monocrop)          | 1             | 0.39                   |
| 21            | Rice(monocrop)                  | 1             | 0.39                   |
| 22            | Winterwheatandbarley(monocrop)  | 1             | 0.39                   |
| 23            | Mulberrybushes                  | 2             | 0.78                   |
| 24            | Winterrape-vegetables           | 1             | 0.39                   |

Source:

Survey  by the authors  in 1996.

tracted  by  each  household  over  the  past  ten  years  declined  as  arable land  was  lost  to other uses and as three-generation  households  changed  to two-generation  households  when money for  new  housing  became  available. In  the  198os  and  early 1990S  it was not uncommon for  older  sons to leave  the farm  for  work  in the factories  of Sunan.  These  workers  returned home with more  than  just  their  savings; they  emulated the desires  of urban  newlyweds  to have  a home of their  own.  Absolute  contracted land  per  household  decreased by  26  percent,  from  0.372 hectare  in  1987 to 0.295  hectare  in 1996.

In  Huaiyin,  the  average household  size  declined  from  6.3  persons  in  1987 to  4.5  in 1996.  In  Huai'an, the decline  was  even  more  striking: Households  dropped  from  6.9 people to 4.3. Figures  for  per capita  arable  land dropped  more.  In many  cases  the sudden  decrease  was  due  to sons  moving  to new  homes.  The  survey  comprised  only 5o  households  per  county,  so we recognize  that  our results  should  interpreted with care,  but they match countywide statistics  very closely and are thus an accurate reflection  of a  dangerous  trend.  Housing  is  claiming  more  and  more  land,  and  local officials  are  unwilling  to deny  building  permits  to families  they  have  known all  of their  lives.  In  other  provinces,  farmers have  been  forced  into  three-story  apartments

to resolve  the issue,  but  this  has  not  yet  occurred  in  Huaiyin  or  Huai'an. As  one  may imagine,  these relocations  are  extremely  unpopular.

In 1978,  per capita arable land in Huaiyin and Huai'an was 0.094  and o.o83 hectare,  respectively. By 1994,  the most recent  year  for  which data  on arable  land are available,  the amounts  had dropped  to o.o8o hectare  in Huaiyin  and  o.o67  hectare for  Huai'an.  As  available land declines  on a  per  capita  basis,  concentration  on grain production-even with radical  price  reform-is less  and  less  realistic as  an  economic strategy  for these households-even  in years  when grain  is in short  supply.

## NEW  MARKETS FOR  SUBEI  FARMERS

The  variety  of  new  crops  in  Subei  is  striking, and  so  are  the  many  new  destinations  for these  commodities.  Farmers in  Huaiyin  and  Huai'an have  more  options  and  opportunities  than  ever  before  to sell  their  crops  throughout  Sunan.  Some  households  cooperate and hire trucks  to vend their produce.  Others  hawk it at township retail markets,  particularly if  older  family  members  are  available to  spend  time  in  the  marketplace.  Most households in the survey,  however,  reported  selling  the majority  of their  produce  at  the  farm  gate  to  wholesalers who arrive  on regular market  days.  The striking  diversity  of strategies  contrasts  sharply  with the  homogeneous conditions found  among  households  in 1986 (Rozelle 1996).

New institutions  have  also  formed  in response  to  both  declining  arable land  and fresh commercial opportunities. Under systems with names such as "collective management"  or "collective  environmental  protection," farmers  and local leaders promote group action in a range  of agricultural tasks,  including  plowing,  planting, and midseason  chemical  applications.  These  genuinely  voluntary  collectives  or cooperatives  at  the  village  or  township  level,  which  pool resources and  labor,  may  also ally  or contract  with other  organizations  to sell  products  in bulk.  Sometimes,  produce  farmers  form  voluntary  cooperatives so that  high-volume  sales  can  be  made  to a large  factory,  a school, or some other  large  work  unit in Nanjing  or Shanghai.  In these  cases,  a  portion  of the  payment  is  made  in  advance. Not merely  a  new  source  of capital,  this system guarantees  work units steady  supplies  of better-quality  vegetables  throughout  the year.

Vegetables  for international  export are  now being produced  in "once-remote" Huai'an.  Some  collectives  grow  shiitake  mushrooms,  which  are  shipped  roughly  260 kilometers  to Shanghai  for  grading  and  sale,  then  exported  to  Japan or,  occasionally, to the United States.

The  visible  changes  in the  Chinese  agricultural  andscape  are  striking.  But  many subtle  changes  have  also  been fostered  by reform  policies.  Jiangsu  newspapers  run the daily  wholesale  prices  at major  Sunan  markets  and  sometimes  even carry  produce  prices  in large  cities  such  as  Nanjing.  As  Huaiyin  pork  has  become famous  for quality  and sanitation,  sales  have  risen,  and the county also  initiated  an aggressive local marketing  program.  Many  of our farmers  sell their  hogs wholesale  to township-operated  firms that slaughter  them. The firms  assure  state  inspection of the meat,  and  each  quarter of the  carcass is  marked  with  an  official  provincial  health  bu-

F1G. 4-A measure of local prosperity, and a point of some pride, is this newly constructed, saniment inspected and dated. The table in the left foreground is laden with homemade noodles, but the rest of this section is devoted to meat. (Photograph by Gregory Veeck, January 1996)

<!-- image -->

the. stAtmaue onfere loalrspeiyn a bufrbysting bothom price, s an utais (el  oftnasorbce,aing tare, nowvete  largely  by migqarkeTonhp demand. Cut.Alpokslttemaktioen Ient 1996cte our hoshldaeoted.Tetbei thigheftfrearondins frewtomefarm sa oles, but  they a retof athisctipat the marevte tr ensand the reopro  thek Timig6an mPotgarke "aurih"dy. mrketu iselection  sare critical.e Figurale6 repotsOactall pricesalculiestatedfo thun darmeds o icrernato receiptsebosecorigy Collectedrom  Nanjingduces WhneiteCloudPa vuhinvaionWhlsal Market Throe flutu matiosi  praiceadaitto foeouffthmorst commonly

kilortamsly ofaChierse  rdis tc sell thprobessi valueicouldr prange frututomnU.5$4 toer uIn  19968  over  theoursehofd feourte  months.So larikes thear Chnsaerdsh  iutsef theya laressonseofthen markecrtpclac aigrebot  biteprt  andtswee (Figues 7cancltd 8.fror houseprholsintedsre,gos eun o vegetables perlregetAsmn thectafare geerllyciv range  from u.s.$1,8oo  to u.s.$9,ooo a  year. In 1996 our households reported higher earnings from farm sales, but they had market selection are critical. Figure 6 reports actual prices calculated from hun-

FIG.  5-In contrast  o  Figure 4, pork  sellers in  the  outdoor  market near  Shanghai Road  in  Nanjing still  rely  on  umbrelias to  keep their  meat  somewhat fresh. Many  of  these  vendors are  from  farm families, but  they  buy  their pork  at  wholesale markets starting at  abOut 5:oo  A.M. each  day. Late in  the  day, prices  are  understandably lower.  (Photograph by  Gregory Veeck, March 1996)

<!-- image -->

## AGAINST THE  GRAIN IN  MILLENNIAL JIANGSU

Comparison  of our farmers'budgets  for wheat and rice  production  in 1987  and 1996 shows that returns for grain are not  competitive  with returns for other crops (Table II).  A  detailed  analysis of data  collected  from  each  household  in  1996  reveals  further problems.

Production budgets are agricultural  research  tools of more than fifty years' standing  in China  and elsewhere  (Buck 1937; Caukins  1983). Balance sheets  show the mean  production  costs  and  returns  for  a  sample  of farmers who are  engaged  in a similar  act'iv'ity-in this  case  growing  wheat  and  rice  in  sequence  within  a  single  agricultural  year.  Of 255 fields  cropped  in  1996,  76 (almost  30 percent)  were  sown to a wheat-rice double-cropping system. Producing  a budget requires  synthesis,  because more variables  than those shown were collected  for each of the 76 observations in the sample.  For  example,  although  applied  inorganic  fertilizer  is reported in Table  II  as  yuan  per  mu,  this  value  may  actually represent  the  application  of  up  to five  types  of fertilizer  with five  different  prices.

The  production  budget  for  wheat  presents  the  mean  values  for  our  survey  of ioo fields  in  1987 and Of  76  fields  in  1996  (24  of the  households  surveyed in  1996  grew  no wheat).  In  a  decade,  there  was  only  a  minute  increase in real  profit  for  wheat  producers.  When the local  opportunity  cost for  labor  estimated  by  each  respondent  is fac-

FIG.  6-Changes  in wholesale  prices  for selected  vegetables  at the White  Cloud  Pagoda  Wholesale Market,  Nanjing's  largest  vegetable  market.

<!-- image -->

tored in, there is no real difference  in the profit  per hectare  in 1996 and in  1987 (u.S.s324.30 versus U.S.$333.OO). Even  compared  with rice, the balance  sheet for wheat is dismal,  despite  the fact  that in 1999 the Chinese  government-subsidized price  was  higher  than  the  market price,  because  the  government  fights  to  protect  future  supplies.

FIG.  7-A shipment  of onlions from  Shandong  arrives  at the  White  Cloud  Pagoda Wholesale Market  in  Nanjing. Vendors and  restaurant owners still  negotiate prices based  on  quality and  sale  volume. (Photograph by  Gregory Veeck, March 1996)

<!-- image -->

Given  the  potential  returns  for other  crops,  it is  clearly  better  to  invest  one's money  in  vegetables, melons, or  livestock than  in  wheat or  rice.  Mean prices Of  0.42 yuan  per  kilogram  in  1986  and  Of 1.4  yuan  per  kilogram  in  1995  were  used  for  the  calculations,  assuming  that  the  wheat  was  of  average quality  and  was  sold  to  the  state.

WVhat is difficult  to include  is the  level  of state  subsidization  for  inputs  of farm chemicals  and fertilizer  in Huaiyin  and  Huai'an; in effect,  subsidies  to households that  grow  grain.  Although  fertilizer prices  have  more than  doubled  since  1989,  the amounts paid by the wheat-producing  household are essentially  at 1987  levels. When nongrain crops (other  than cotton) are  grown,  no subsidies  are  provided.  If the state  and  provincial  governments  did not provide  low-cost fertilizer  to graingrowing  farmers,  returns  would be even  lower-and  farmers  would  experience  net losses in a  poor crop  year.

The Chinese  government  is  suspended  in a  complicated  web.  By  subsidizing  input costs,  purchasing  prices,  distribution,  and retail  sales  to urban  consumers,  the government  underwrites  all  aspects  of the  grain  trade.  As  of March  1999, according to  one  estimate, China's  grain-purchasing  and -distribution system was losing u.s.$i.8 billion  per  month (Smith  1999).  The  reasons  for  the  subsidies  are  the  reasons food prices  are  underwritten throughout  the  world.  Rising  food  prices,  especially in cities,  during  periods  of economic  restructuring and  sectoral  stagnation  invariably result  in social unrest.  Furthermore, if food prices  rise,  so will the cost of exports,

FIG.  8-Hot peppers from northern  Jiangsu  Province for sale at Nanjing's  White Cloud Pagoda Wholesale Market. Men  were dominant in  the  state-managed produce-distribution systems prior to the  reforms in  1978,  but  now  women often  manage these wholesale stalls. (Photograph by  Gregory Veeck, April 1996)

<!-- image -->

which are  increasingly  important  to the Chinese  economy.  As in the United  States, the  European  Union,  and  most  of the  rest  of the  world,  China  cannot  afford  either  to continue  the subsidies  or to abandon  them.

As all  signatories  of the General  Agreement  on Tariffs and  Trade  will attest,  removing  these  subsidies  once  they  have  been  instated  is  a  most  politically  charged issue  with  many  stark  implications-for farmers, consumers,  and  ultimately  the  state. Despite  the  poor  economic returns  for  wheat,  local  and  provincial  agents  must  still work  constantly  to see  that  wheat  production  does not decline  even  farther. By  and large  this has been accomplished  by underwriting  input  costs.  If the  price  of inorganic fertilizers  paid by  farmers  has not changed,  the cost of seed  has  skyrocketed while  average applications  of organic manure per  hectare have plummeted.  Farmers use  better  seed  and  less  expensive  fertilizer, yet  less  soil-saving  organic  material.  Few alternative crops  can  be  grown  in  JiangsuE s winter  (barley  or  rape),  so most farmers will  probably  continue to  grow wheat, but increasingly  they expect to make no money in the venture,  and  they  will  manage  and maintain  their  fields  less and  less carefully.

An  even  more  pressing  domestic  issue  for China  is rice  production.  As with wheat,  the mean  yield  for  our  sample  farmers  declined  slightly, but the difference  is well within annual  variance  for the region  and is not statistically  significant.  The

TABLE  II-SURVEY HOUSEHOLDS  MEAN  PRODUCTION BUDGET  FOR  WINTER  WHEAT  AND FOR  RICE, HUAIYIN  AND HUAI'AN  COUNTIES, JIANGSU  PROVINCE, CHINAa

|                                                             | WINTER WHEAT   | WINTER WHEAT   |   RICE |    RICE |
|-------------------------------------------------------------|----------------|----------------|--------|---------|
|                                                             | 1987           | 1996           | 1987   | 1996    |
| Yield(in jin permu)                                         | 652.2          | 583.2          | 1000.6 |  948.5  |
| Grossvalue of yield (in yuanpermu)                          | 137.00         | 408.24         |  190.1 |  758.8  |
| Capital (in yuan per mu):                                   |                |                |        |         |
| Inorganic fertilizer                                        | 22.5           | 22.9           |   19.1 |   33.4  |
| Seed                                                        | 10.4           | 23.64          |    5.6 |   10.04 |
| Tillage/harvestfee                                          | 4.1            | 13.1           |    3.8 |   16.12 |
| Farmchemicals                                               | 2.00           | 7.7            |    3   |   12.5  |
| Irrigationfee                                               | N.A.b          | N.A.b          |    3.7 |   30    |
| Total                                                       | 39.00          | 67.34          |   35.2 |  102.6  |
| Labor:                                                      |                |                |        |         |
| Hourspermu                                                  | 59.3           | 69.75          |   63.6 |   58.5  |
| Yuan per hour                                               | 0.3            | 2.25           |    0.3 |    2.25 |
| Yuanpermu                                                   | 17.8           | 156.9          |   19.1 |  131.63 |
| All types of organicmanuresapplied, byvolume (in jin permu) | 4,338          | 1,648          | 4224   | 3051    |
| Net profitper mu,without labor                              | 98.00          | 340.9          |  154.9 |  656.2  |
| Net profitpermu, includingwages                             | 80.2           | 184.00         |  135.8 |  525.11 |

Source: Mean values  calculated  from  the authors' sample  survey  of 76 fields,  1996.

a Equivalents: 1  jin  =  0.5 kilograms; 1  mu  =  o.o67 hectare. Exchange rates:  in 1987,3.7  yuan  =  U.S.$1.o0; in 1996, 8.29 yuan  =  U.S.$1.oo.

b N.A.  =  not applicable.

government  recognizes  the  importance  of purchase price  in  stimulating  production and  has  raised  prices  repeatedly, but  much  of this  increase has  been  "eaten up"  by  rising production costs. The average  adjusted  price per kilogram  of average-quality rice rose from u.s.so.io  to U.S.$o.19 between 1987 and 1996,  but fertilizer  costs increased  by  50  percent,  seed costs  by loo percent,  tillage  fees  by more  than  400 percent, and irrigation  fees  by  almost i,ooo percent.  In  short,  even  though returns  for rice  are  better  now,  due  to government  intervention, the  price  increase  has  not been enough to make  rice  production  competitive  with other  nongrain  activities.  Were the decision  by farmers  to grow  rice  based  simply  on economic factors,  far  less  of it would be grown in Jiangsu.

What assures  rice its preeminent  position in Huaiyin  and Huai'an  land use is that  virtually  all  households  must  produce  their  own food and,  therefore,  routinely sell  less  than  35  percent  of  their  total  output  to  the  state.  Each  household  continues  to be required  to sell  a  small  portion  of crop  to  the  state  for  a  fixed  price  as  public  grain. The  amount  is  based  on the  area  of land  contracted  and  the  number  of family  members.  Still,  available land is declining.  Even  if additional  land  were  to become available  as  labor  shifts  to rural  industry, given  the  types  of returns  on vegetables  or feed for  family-produced  livestock,  land  will  not be planted  to rice  unless  coercion  is applied.

Of potentially  great  environmental  import  is a  dramatic  decline  in organic  manure application  by virtually  all  the farmers  in our sample  (Table  II). Long  a hallmark  of Chinese  agriculture, organic  manure  permits  intensive  cropping.  Organic household fertilizers  span  a  wide range  of products  that  improve  both soil fertility and  overall  soil  structure. These  include:  manure; household  wastes; night  soil;  crop straw;  grass,  pond or canal  mud;  ash;  green  manure;  and  other  available  materials. Unfortunately, applications  per  hectare  of wheat  and  rice  are  down,  even  though  the number  of swine  owned  by  the  average household  nearly  doubled  between  1987  and 1996. For  wheat,  applications  per  hectare  dropped  from  32,535  kilograms  in 1987  to 12,360  kilograms  in 1996. For  rice,  in  1987  the  mean  amount  applied  was  31,680  kilograms  per  hectare; it  declined  to 22,732  kilograms in 1996.  The  decreases are  not due to a shortage  of available  material,  for  manure  is more  available than ever  because the  production  of pork  and  fowl  has  increased  dramatically. The  manure  is now applied  where  it will  bring  the  greatest  cash  returns-on vegetables.  Such  declines  will affect  long-term  land  fertility, especially  on land  that  is  double  cropped  and  has  virtually no time to regenerate  naturally.  Local  extension agents  told us that longer land-use contracts-perhaps twenty  to thirty  years  or more-would  increase  farmers'  interest  in environmental  protection,  but it  will  be difficult  to reverse this  trend as  long as chemical  fertilizer  is available for  grain.

## PREDICTING  FARM INCOME FROM CROP SALES

In  1996,  mean  grain  sales  accounted  for  just  over  36.2  percent  of  the  value  of off-farm sales  of  agricultural products  by  the  households  in  our  sample.  The  proportions  varied widely,  from  less  than  1  percent  of household  income  to almost  82 percent.  Our preliminary  analyses  found no correlation  between  the  value  of grain  sales  and  the gross  value  of agricultural sales  by  household.  That  is,  for  most households  selling grain  was  unimportant  in  determining  the  total  value  of off-farm  sales,  a  conclusion supported  by interviews  with farmers  and consistent  with the results  presented  in Table  II.  Other  household characteristics may  predict  farm  sales  more effectively.

Toward  this end,  we evaluated  five  independent  variables  that  we hypothesized would affect  the annual  value  of off-farm  sales  (our dependent  variable)  for 82 of our original  sample  of loo households (the remaining  18  households reported  no off-farm  sales): LANDAREA,  the area of contracted land per household;  MEANDIST, the mean  distance  from  home to the  fields  contracted  by  the  household;  ECONAREA, the  amount  of  land  sown  to  economic  (nongrain)  crops;  ANIMALSAL, a  dummyvariable  reflecting  off-farm  sales  of  livestock  or  fowl  amounting  to more  than  loo yuan; and FAMSIZE, the number  of people  in the  household  (Table  III).  Of  these  variables, we hypothesized,  LANDAREA,  ECONAREA, and ANIMALSAL would positively affect the gross  value  of sales,  because  greater amounts  of contracted land  and  more  land  sown to more  profitable economic  crops  should  boost  the  total  value.  The  sale  of  livestock also represents  some measure  of value added  from  on-farm  processing,  which  we believed  should also  boost the  gross  value  of sales.  On  the  other  hand,  we  hypothesized that MEANDIST and FAMSIZE would negatively  affect sales,  because distant

TABLE III-REGRESSION ANALYSIS PREDICTING OFF-FARM SALES  FOR  SAMPLED HOUSEHOLDS IN HUAIYIN AND  HUAI'AN COUNTIES, JIANGSU PROVINCE, CHINA, 1996

|                                                  | HUAIYIN   | HUAI'AN   |
|--------------------------------------------------|-----------|-----------|
| Dependent crop sales (in yuan):a                 |           |           |
| Intercept                                        | 1,702.65  | 477.27    |
| Probability of t values                          | .2304     | .593      |
| Independent variables:                           |           |           |
| Household arable land (LANDAREA)                 | -215.86   | 744.87b   |
| (Probability oft values)                         | (0.2114)  | (.00001)  |
| Mean distance to fields (MEANDIST)               | -.3530    | -3.7430b  |
| (Probability of t values)                        | (.4707)   | (.0095)   |
| Sown to nongrain crops (ECONAREA)                | -3,776.1b | 2,232.2   |
| (Probability of t values)                        | (0.0238)  | (0.110)   |
| Dummy variable for selling more than 200 yuan of | 4,069.9b  | 335.38    |
| livestock (ANIMALSAL)                            |           |           |
| (Probability oft values)                         | (0.00001) | (0.476)   |
| Family size (FAMSIZE)                            | 112.14    | -490.20b  |
| (Probability of t values)                        | (0.729)   | (0.018)   |
| Diagnostics:                                     |           |           |
| Adjusted R2                                      | 0.380     | 0.712     |
| F-ratio (model)                                  | 6.47      | 19.78     |
| Probability that F is not equal to zero          | 0.0000    | 0.0000    |
| Sample size                                      | 44        | 38        |

Source: Calculated  by the  authors  from  their sample  survey.

a  Exchange rate:  in  1996,  8.29  yuan = U.S.$1.oo.

b Significant at  .o5  or  better.

fields  are  more  difficult  to fertilize  with the  organic  manures  required  for  optimum production of vegetables  and melons and  thus  would be sown to grain.  Finally,  we assumed that large  families  need more grain,  reducing  the amount of arable  land that  can  be committed  to other  ventures  and,  as  a  consequence,  deducting  from  the value of sales.

We divided the households  by county to determine  whether  results  would vary by location. They do, significantly: The model for Huai'an  achieved  a much better level  of explanatory  power  (adjusted  R2 =  0.71)  than  did  that  for  Huaiyin  (adjusted R = 0.38). For  the  five  independent  variables, across  the  two  locations,  only  one  variable,  ECONAREA, was significant  in both places  (even at p = .11, when the signs reverse).  Still,  two of five  hypothesized  variables are  significant  for  Huaiyin  (at .05 or better),  and three  of five  are  significant  for  Huai'an  (at .05  or better).

In  sum,  the  models  are  significant  and  stable,  although  the  explanatory power  of the Huaiyin  model is limited.  What  is most clear  is  that  although  these  two  counties are  adjacent,  Huaiyin  and  Huai'an  are  different  places-and that  their  farm  households  have  adopted  very  different  strategies for  generating income from  agriculture. The following scenario  emerges.

For  the Huaiyin sample,  the highest reported  sales  of off-farm  products  come from  households  that  grow  grain  but  use  their  surplus  for  feeder  operations  at  home

and  sell  no grain  to  the  state. This  is  the  way  to  live  in  a  rice-growing district  and  still make  some money:  One grows  grain  as  required, but one does  not sell  it-one  converts it to pork.  A further  measure  of Huaiyin's focus on livestock  is that the area sown to economic crops is actually  a drag  on maximum  sales  per household (the coefficient  for  ECONAREA in Huaiyin  is  negative). With  prices  for  quality  feed  at  levels  at  or  above  mean  prices  for  rice  and  wheat,  farmers gain  the  most  by  raising  livestock  and  feeding  them  surplus  grain,  even  though  rice  and  wheat-the  major  grains of these farms-are  extremely  inefficient  feedstuffs.  This is reasonable  from the household's  perspective  but a poor use of resources.

The results  for Huai'an  are  markedly  different,  for farmers  there  are  utilizing increasingly  unique income-generating  strategies;  and whereas  Huaiyin  farmers concentrate  on livestock,  those  in Huai'an  concentrate  on vegetables.  Huai'an  specializes  in selling  vegetables  to cities,  and the sale of livestock  is not a significant contributor  to the  gross  value  of sales.  Significant relationships  for  Huai'an  include total  crop  area,  area  sown in economic crops  (p = .11), distance  to fields,  and  size  of the household. The larger  area  sown to nongrain  crops  translates  to a  higher  gross value for  vegetables  sold by Huai'an  farmers.  Greater  sales  mean  higher  incomes.

Commercialization  of agriculture  has helped farmers  in Subei,  but their incomes lag when compared  with those of factory  workers  (Su and  Veeck  1995).  Reported  per  capita  incomes,  adjusted for  inflation,  for  the  Huaiyin  households  in the survey  rose  only  34 percent,  from  u.s.$187.oo  in  1987 to  U.S.$251.00 in  1996. In Huai'an,  beyond  the reach  of legislation  that  makes  grain  growing  mandatory, the increase  was  also  34  percent, but  the  mean  absolute  per  capita  income  was  25  percent greater there than in Huaiyin, because per capita income increased from u.s.$235.00 to U.S.$314.52.  This compares with an urban per capita income  in Jiangsu in 1987  of u.s.$350.OO,  which  increased to u.s.$625.54 in 1996 (ZTN  1988, 199;  1997,  300).

## FINDINGS

In Jiangsu  a clear  distinction  exists  between  grain  economies and economies that produce other crops. Despite price adjustments  and subsidies,  grain production during  the reform  era  remains  a poor investment  for  household  labor  and  capital. Net income from the production  of wheat  has changed  only insignificantly  since 1987.  Returns  for rice are slightly  better,  but only because  price adjustments  are greater.

Although  we recognize  that  policies  surrounding  grain  production  are  fraught with a  peril  that  many  a  European Union or  American  trade  negotiator knows  all  too well,  we believe  that the other  positive  results  of China's market-reform  strategies deserve  greater  international  recognition.  Because  of the fixation  on grain-related issues,  this respect  has yet  to materialize.

If any  other  nation  were  to record  increases  in production  commensurate  with China's, the  pundits  would  be ecstatic.  Our  surveys  show  that  economic  conditions are  improving  on the  farms  of Huaiyin  and  Huai'an, an  area  once  renowned  only  for great  poverty.  Simply  put,  market  access  has  improved  remarkably, due in no small

measure  to sales  of vegetables  and  livestock.  A  great  variety  of products  from  Subei now flow quite freely  to Sunan  and  beyond,  providing  consumers  with better  diets and more choices. Still, oversupply  and insufficient  information about regional market  prices  have  limited the benefits  of nongrain  farm  production.

The  market  alone  cannot  solve  problems  of  low  returns for  meat,  grain,  and  produce:  Every  major  agricultural nation is experiencing  low prices  and related  problems in the new millennium.  Still,  our surveys  support  other  research  and  popular opinion which  maintain  that  the  "grain  problem" must  be  resolved through  a  mix  of policy adjustments  and economic incentives (Liu and Huang 1995;  China Daily 1996;  Huang  1998).  Most  Chinese  experts  suggest  that,  painful  though  the  process  be in the  short  run,  grain  markets must  be  reformed  and  allowed  to reach  some  equilibrium of price and supply.  Government  intervention  can cushion the adjustment. Considering  the agricultural policy  histories  of the  United  States  and  other  Western nations,  simply  rushing  headlong  to the market  may  well  cause  as  much  damage  in China  as  ignoring  the  problem.  Typically, the  fastest way  to fuel  inflation  and  unrest in China's  urban  areas,  and  to restrict  the  growth  of the  economy  at  large,  would  be to raise  the price  of food, particularly grain,  rapidly.

China's  leaders find themselves  in a dilemma, albeit a common one. Grainsecurity issues are  important to Beijing  and the urban  population of China,  but continued market  reform  of the agricultural sector  is of even  greater  concern.  The sheer  count of farmers  in China  makes  nationally  instigated  draconian  regulations affecting grain production genuine threats  to social stability.  Higher consumer prices  will fuel inflation and make  manufactured  goods more expensive  in global and domestic markets.  Continued low prices  will assure  long-term shortages  of grain  while other  agricultural activities  claim  ever-greater shares  of  land,  labor,  and capital.

If  the  agricultural reform  policies  that  are  being  revised  do not somehow  square the circle  and promote grain  production,  while also permitting  the production  of crops currently  under the "invisible  hand,"  national interests  will suffer.  On the other  hand,  times  change.  Farmers wish  for,  perhaps  now even  demand,  inclusion  in this debate.  The agricultural economy found in every  province,  every  county,  and perhaps even every  village is now often quite different  from that in neighboring places.  Agriculture in more  affluent  regions  has  grown  increasingly commercial  and diversified, reflecting  a  growing  responsiveness to  the  larger  economy  (Xu  1988; Fleisher and Liu 1992; Li R.  X. 1996;  Zhou 1996).  Poor  locations in central  or western China  still  depend  on grain  and  a  strictly  limited  number  of cash  crops.  This  makes much more complicated  the implementation  of nationwide  pricing,  distribution, and  environmental  protection  policies  sent  from  Beijing. If  effective  policies  cannot come from  the  top down,  from  where  do  they  issue? Are  the  provinces willing  to  take on the task?  Would concentrating  power  and policymaking  at the provincial  level help?

It  is  increasingly clear  that  grain  production  and  other  agricultural activities  are moving in different  directions  in response  to different  economic stimuli.  Although

this has raised  incomes,  in Jiangsu it has  also  introduced  inputs  with a direct  effect on the environment  and  health  of consumers.  Issues  of greatest  concern  in the flat alluvial  lands  of East  China  include  the  use  of field  plastics,  a  decline  in the  application of organic  manures,  and  the  greater amount  of pesticides  and  herbicides  associated with nongreenhouse  vegetable  and grain  production.  Furthermore, because most nitrogen,  phosphorous,  and  potassium  for  grain  production  now come from inorganic  fertilizer, health  problems  related  to field  runoff  and  local water  quality are  on the rise.

Market  and  government  must  work  together  to find  solutions  to  these  problems. Consumers  with choices  may  demand  pesticide-free  produce,  certified  meats,  and better-quality  products.  The "green  food"  movement  in Jiangsu  is a case  in point. Local  activism  will  alert  the  government  to  the  significance of these  issues  to  Jiangsu residents.  Farmers will  respond  when  consumers  pay,  or  if  the  government  provides financial  and  technical  support.  Still,  farmers will  continue  to  use  the  least  expensive pesticides  and herbicides-oil based and enduring-unless they are regulated  and offered  affordable  alternatives.

There  is an  irony  in the  timing  of our  research. When  we set out to conduct  the interviews  and surveys  in 1996,  China's  economy was booming. Over  and over  we asked experts, "How can the superheated  economy be slowed?"  As we conclude work on this article  in 2000, a recession  is hobbling  the nation's  general  economy, driving  large-scale layoffs  in Jiangsu's historic  heavy-industry cities  of Nanjing,  Xuzhou, Yangzhou,  and Nantong. Recession  threatens  erosion of the success  we saw during  our  stints  in  Huaiyin  and  Huai'an Counties.  Such  are  the  dangers of  the  marketplace.  The more integrated  these local economies become, the more they are affected  by macroeconomic  trends.  Industrial  cities,  in consort  with Shanghai  and the great  Sunan  cities  of Suzhou,  Wuxi,  and  Changzhou,  represent  the consumers who have  played  a critical  role  in transforming the rural  economy.  Distant  markets may  shine  with  the  beacon  of prosperity, but dependence  upon  that  beacon  can  put Jiangsu  farmers  and  the  villages  they  represent at  risk-an old  lesson,  always difficult to master.

## REFERENCES

Beijing  Review. 1998. CPC  Session  Stresses  Importance  of Agriculture.

Brown,  L.  1995.

Beijing  Review  41  (44):  4. Who Will  Feed  China?  Wake-up Callfor  a Small  Planet.  New York: W.  W.  Norton.

- Buck,  J.  L.  1937. Land  Utilization  in China:A  Study  of  i6,786  Farms  in  l68 Localities, and38,256  Farm Families  in Twenty-Two Provinces in China,  1929-1933. Chicago:  University  of Chicago  Press.
- Cartier, C.  L.  1995. Singaporean  Investment  in China:  Installing  the  Singapore Model  in Sunan.  Chinese Environment  and Development  6 (1  &amp; 2):  117-144.
- Cheng  L.  and Lu  X. S.  1984. Zhongguo  Nongye  Dili (China's Agricultural Geography).  Beijing:  Agricultural  Publishing  House.
- Caukins,  P. 1983. Agricultural  Economics-U.S. and China:  Is  There  a  Meeting  Ground?  In  Agriculture  and  Rural  Development  in China  Today, 120-139. Cornell  International Mimeograph  No. 102. Ithaca,  N.Y.:  Cornell  University.

China Daily. 1996. Farmers'  Issues  Top  the Agenda.  China  Daily,  2  February, ?1, 4. Eberhard,  W. 1977. A History  of China.  4th ed. Berkeley: University  of California  Press.

- Fan,  C.  C.  1995. Spatial  Impacts  of China's Economic  Reforms  in  Jiangsu  and  Guangdong  Provinces. Chinese  Environment and Development  6 (1 &amp; 2):  85-116.

- Fleisher,  B.  M., and  Y.  H. Liu.  1992. Economies  of Scale,  Plot  Size,  Human  Capital,  and  Productivity in Chinese Agriculture.  Quarterly Review  of  Economics and Finance  32  (3):  112-123.
- FBIS  [Foreign  Broadcast  Information  Service]. 1982. Jiangsu Agricultural Geography. China  Report: Agriculture  No. 197.  Microfilm,  ref.  No. JPRS 80504: 81-86.
- Gitomer, C. S.  1996. Potato  and Sweet  Potato  in China:  Systems,  Constraints, and Potential.  Lima, Peru:  International  Potato Center.
- Hart,J.  F.,  and  C.  Mayda. 1997. PorkPalacesonthePanhandle.  GeographicalReview87 (3):  396-400.
- Hsueh T.-T,  Sung  Y.-W.,  and Yu  J.,  eds.  1993. Studies  on Economic Reforms  and  Development  in the People's Republic  of China.  Hong Kong:  Chinese  University  Press;  New York: St.  Martin's Press.
- Huang Y. 1998. Agricultural  Reform  in China:  Getting  Institutions  Right.  Cambridge,  England,  and New York:  Cambridge  University  Press.
- JN [Jiangsu  Nianjian (Jiangsu  Yearbook)]. 1996. Beijing:  Jiangsu  Yearbook  Publishers.
- Johnson, G. D.  1994. Does China  Have  a Grain  Problem?  China  Economic Review  4 (1):  1-14.
- JTN [Jiangsu  Tongji  Nianjian (Jiangsu  Statistical  Yearbook)].  1995,  1997.  Beijing:  China Statistical Publishing  House.
- Kueh,  Y.-Y. 1995. Agricultural Instability  in China,  1931-1991:  Weather, Technology, and Institutions. Oxford:  Clarendon  Press;  New York:  Oxford  University  Press.
- Kung,  J.  K.  1995. Equal  Entitlement  versus  Tenure  Security  under a Regime  of Collective  Property Rights:  Peasants  Preference for  Institutions  in  Post-Reform  Chinese  AgricultureJournal of  Comparative  Economics 21 (1): 82-111.
- Leeming, F. 1994. Necessity,  Policy,  and Opportunity in the Chinese Countryside.  In China:  The Next Decades,  edited by D. Dwyer,  77-94. Harlow,  England:  Longman  Scientific  &amp;  Technical.
- Li P. 1996. China Is an Important  Force  Dedicated  to World  Food Security.  Beijing  Review  39 (49): 7-8.
- Li  P.  andYin  D.  A.  1998. Corn  Output  in China  UnaffectedbyFlooding.  ChinaNews  Digest,  23  October.  [http://www.cnd.org/CND-Global/CND-Global.98.4th/CND-Global.98-1o-23.html].
- Li R.  X.  1996. Suzhou Pursues  Grain  Self-Sufficiency. Beijing  Review  39  (40):  13-15.
1998. Agricultural  Achievement:  No Easy  Task.  Beijing  Review  41  (33):  8-1o.
- Lin, J.  Y.,  F.  Cai, and Z. Li.  1996.  The  China  Miracle:  Development  Strategy  and Economic  Reform. Hong Kong:  Chinese University  Press.
- Liu  D. G. and Huang  L.  G.  1995. Nongchanping  Chenben  Shouyi  Fenxian  (Profit  Analysis  and  Production Costs for Agricultural  Products). In Zhongguo  Nongye  Nianjian (China Agricultural Yearbook),  552-555.  Beijing:  China  Agricultural  Publishing  House.
- Liu,  W.,  R.  Zhang,  and  G.  Wan. 1997. Severe  Floods Claim  82  Lives  in China.  China  News  Digest,  14 July.  [ftp://ftp.cnd.org/pub/cnd-global/1997.7-12/cnd-global.97-07-14.Z].
- Marton,  A.  1995. Mega-Urbanization  in Southern  Jiangsu: Enterprise  Location  and  the  Reconstitution of Local  Space.  Chinese  Environment and Development  6 (1  &amp;  2): 9-42.
- NBBB [Nongye Bu Buzhang  Bangongshi  (Agricultural Bureau,  Office  of the  Director)].  1996.  Nongcun Fazhan  Gaikuang  (The General  Situation  in  Village  Development).  In  Zhongguo Nongye  Nianjian (China Agricultural  Yearbook),  41-43.  Beijing:  China  Agricultural  Publishing  House.
- Nong,  R.  1995.  Who  Will  Be Able to  Feed China.  Beijing Review 38 (29): 11-15.
- Perkins,  D.  H.  1991. Price  Reform  vs.  Enterprise Autonomy:  Which  Should  Have  Priority? In China's Economic  Dilemmas  in the  i19os: 7he  Problems of  Reforms, Modernization, and  Interdependence, i:  160-167.  Study papers  submitted to the Joint Economic Committee of the Congress  of the United States.  Washington,  D.C.:  Government  Printing  Office.
- Rong C.  1988.  China Flood Relief:  The Suffering.  [http://www.cnd.org/topics/floods98].
- Rozelle,  S.  1996.  Decision-Making  in China's  Rural  Economy:  The Linkages  between  Village  Leaders and  Farm Households. China Quarterly 137 (1): 99-124.
- Rozelle,  S.,  and  L.  Y.  Jiang. 1995. Survival  Strategies and  Recession  in Rural  Jiangsu.  Chinese  Environment and Development  6 (1 &amp; 2): 43-84.
- Rozelle,  S., G.  Veeck,  and J.  K.  Huang.  1997. The Impact  of Environmental  Degradation  on Grain Production in China.  Economic  Geography 71  (1):  44-66.
- Sicular,  T.  1988. Agricultural Planning  and  Pricing  in the  Post-Mao  Period.  China  Quarterly 116  (4): 671-705.
1991.  China's Agricultural  Policy  during  the  Reform  Period.  In China's Economic  Dilemmas in the  19os:  The  Problems of  Reforms, Modernization, and  Interdependence, 1:  340-365.  Study  pa-

- pers  submitted  to the  Joint  Economic  Committee  of the  Congress  of the  United  States.  Washington, D.C.:  Government  Printing  Office.
- Simpson,  J.  R.,  Xu  C.,  and  A.  Miyazaki. 1994. China's Livestock and  RelatedAgriculture: Projections to 2025. Wallingford,  England:  CAB  International.
- Smil,  V.  1993. China's Environmental Crisis: An Inquiry  into  the  Limits  of  National  Development. Armonk, N.Y.:  M. E.  Sharpe.
- Smith,  C.  S.  1999. How  China  Managed  to Lose  $25  Billion  on Its  Grain  Program.  Wall  Streetjournal, 26 January,  ?A,  6.
- Su,  S.  J.,  and G.  Veeck. 1995. Foreign  Capital  Acquisition  by  Rural  Industries  in Jiangsu.  Chinese  Environment  and Development  6 (1 &amp; 2): 169-192.
- Sun J., ed.  1988. The Economic  Geography of China. Hong Kong and Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
- Teiwes,  F.  C.,  andW.  Sun.  1993. ThePolitics ofAgricultural Cooperativization in China:  Mao,  DengZihui, and the "High  Tide"  of 1955.  Armonk,  N.Y.:  M. E.  Sharpe.
- Tyler,  P.  1996. No Rights  Mean No Incentive  for China's  Farmer's. New York  Times,  15  December, ?Y,lo.
- Xu, Z. K.  1988. Rational  Use of Cultivated  Land  in the Beijing-Tianjin-Tangshan Region. Chinese Geography and Environment  1 (2): 35-51.
- Zhong, P. 1994. From  State  Control  to a Managed  Liberalized Market:  Dilemmas  in the Reform  of the Grain  Price  System  of China.  In RegulatingAgriculture, edited  by P.  Lowe,  T.  Marsden,  and S.  Whatmore,  127-148.  London:  David Fulton  Publishers.
- Zhou S. W.  1992. China  Provincial  Geography. Beijing:  Foreign  Language Press.
- Zhou X.  1996. China's  Agriculture:  Hopeful Despite Existing Problems.  Beijing  Review  39 (39): 16-18.
- ZTN [Zhongguo  Tongji Nianjian (China  Agricultural Yearbook)]. 1984. Beijing:  China  Agricultural Publishing  House.
- .  1988,1997,1998. Beijing: China  Statistical  Publishing  House.