## American Geographical Society

The Unnatural History of the Monterey Pine Author(s): Roger A. Clapp

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 85, No. 1 (Jan., 1995), pp. 1-19

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215551 .

Accessed: 09/05/2014 16:57

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## The Geographical Review

VOLUME 85

January 1995

NUMBER 1

## THE UNNATURAL  HISTORY  OF THE MONTEREY  PINE

## ROGER  A. CLAPP

ABSTRACT. Once a relict  species,  the  Monterey  pine  is now  the  preeminent  timber tree  of  maritime  temperate lands.  Plantation forestry  has  become  a remarkable economic success in  Chile, and  predictions of  disease in  pine monocultures remain  unfulfilled. The issue  of  ecological sustainability is  unresolved. A broad view  of  sustainability, extended to  include  the  livelihoods of  the  rural  population,  requires a new  model  of  forestry  to  supplement the  plantation model  in densely  populated rural areas. The  article  proposes a  possible  ecology of  exotic species in  Chilean  Araucania. Key  words:  agroforestry,  Chile,  Mapuche, Monterey pine, peasant agriculture, plantation  forestry,  sustainable  development.

ith the  depletion  of  old-growth  forests  in northern  temperate  countries,  comparative advantage  in  forestry  has  shifted  to  regions where trees  grow  fast. In that transition foresters turn to the trees that grow  fastest of all. Foremost  among  them are  pine  and  eucalyptus,  which account for more than 70  percent  of all  plantations  in  developing  countries. As  exotic  trees in  new  environments, both  genera  have  several advantages  over  native  species.  One is  temporary:  the  predators  and parasites  of each tree in its endemic area are absent in its new  home. Decades  may pass  before old  predators  arrive to  plague  the  plantations or before new  predators develop  a taste for the exotic wood. In the case of  pine  and  eucalyptus  new  pests  have been few,  despite  the diffusion of the trees  throughout  the  tropical  and maritime  temperate regions.

The other  advantages  of  pine  and  eucalyptus  are  permanent. They meet the four main  requirements  for  plantation  trees  (Hartshorn  1983): they  are  pioneer species; they reproduce  easily; they grow exceptionally fast; and  the  demand for their wood  is  reliable. Pioneer  species  have adapted  to colonize  open  land:  both  pine  and  eucalyptus  are  hardy  and fast  growing,  tolerant  of  drought,  and  adapted  to survive fire.  Their  seeds germinate  and root in  poor soils,  even  on the eroded  slopes  of  gullies where  few  other  plants  survive,  which  makes them attractive for the

DR. CLAPP is  an assistant professor of  geography at the  University of  Toronto,  Toronto, Ontario,  Canada  M5S lA1.

Copyright  ? 1995  by  the  American  Geographical Society  of  New York

recuperation  of deforested and  degraded  land.  They reproduce  successfully  in  nursery  conditions and  grow  to marketable  size in a  generation. Within  twenty years many plantation-grown  pines  reach  the  peak  of their mean  annual  increment; several  eucalyptus  species  are harvested  in rotations as short as five  years. Finally  and  perhaps  most  importantly, there are  large  and  expanding  international  markets  for the wood. Plantation-grown pines  are  especially  marketable  and  provide adequate general-purpose  construction lumber and  long-fiber  cellulose  pulp.  The market for  eucalyptus pulp  is more recent,  but it has  expanded rapidly since 1960.

High-productivity  silviculture increases wood  yield  dramatically.  It has been estimated that one hectare  of  plantation  could  provide  as much wood  as ten hectares of natural forest  (Lanly 1982),  and more than a decade  ago  it was  predicted  that under  plantation management  a mere 5 to  10  percent  of  the  productive  forest area in  the world  could  satisfy industrial demand  (Sedjo 1983).  In Chile exotic  plantations  almost meet those  expectations:  tree farms  provide  85  percent  of the  country's  wood harvest, although they  are  only  15  percent  of the total commercial  forest in area and 16  percent  in wood volume  (INFOR  1991).  Of those  plantations 85  percent  are  Monterey pine;  the rest are  mostly eucalyptus.  Pine plantations  now  occupy  15,000  square  kilometers of south-central  Chile (Fig.  1).  Plantation  forestry  dwarfs  native  forestry  in  production  and profits  and has  displaced  it in the main markets  for forest  products.  The native forests in Chile are both  depleted  and  degraded,  and industries based on them have been in decline since the 1950s.  Nevertheless, Chile boasts one of the most  rapidly expanding forest-products  industries in the world. Total  domestic  product  in  forestry  doubled between 1983  and 1990, and  export earnings tripled.  The value of forest  exports  reached U.S.$1  billion in 1992.

Its  rapid growth  and  well-developed  markets  have made  pine  a more profitable  crop  than native trees or annual  crops.  Owners of  agricultural land have an incentive to  replace  tenant farmers and their  crops  with exotic trees,  and owners of forestland  have an  incentive to cut native trees and to  plant  exotics in their  place.  The success of exotic  species  in Chile and elsewhere  presents  a crisis-an opportunity replete  with  dangers,  in which exotic  forestry  offers  an  alternative  supply  of timber  and an  engine of economic  growth  but threatens to  displace  both native  species  and rural inhabitants. I  argue  that Chile needs  a new  model  of  forestry  to supplement,  but not  replace, plantation forestry,  one which  accommodates  peasant  livelihoods,  landscape diversity,  and timber  production. This article  reviews the  geography  of the  Monterey  pine  and the  ecological and social effects of the Chilean  plantations.  It concludes that forest Chile faces the risks of  catastrophic  disease and  displacement  of the rural

l

|

FIG.  1-Current dominant  forest  types  in Chile  from Constituci6n  to Puerto Montt.

<!-- image -->

population.  To combine  ecological  and social  sustainability  it  proposes an inventionist  approach  to tree  farming.

## GEOGRAPHY  OF THE MONTEREY  PINE

The  Monterey  pine (Pinus  radiata) is native to the California  coast,  but anthropogenic dispersal  has made it the most  widely planted  tree in the world  (Zobel,  van  Wyk,  and Stahl  1987).  Known outside North America as the radiata  pine,  it has become  the  staple  softwood  in  Chile,  New Zealand, Australia,  and the  Cape  Province of South Africa.  It is  planted successfully  in  Spain  and  Portugal  and  widely  but less  successfully  in Kenya  and Brazil.  It  is ironic  that  the  Monterey  pine  should be so successful under human  manipulation,  because it is a relict  species  in its native range  and survives  only  in five small California  refugia.  The  pine grows in  hilltop  stands of some 400 hectares near Point Afio Nuevo  and 1,000 hectares near Cambria.  The  largest  stand  grows  on the  Monterey  Peninsula,  where  pine  forests  occupy  4,000 hectares from the coast to  eight kilometers inland  along  the Carmel  Ridge,  which marks  the  pine's greatest  penetration  inland. In two  other sites,  on  Guadalupe  and Cedros islands off the coast of  Baja  California,  the  pine appears  in a two-needle variety (Libby,  Bannister,  and Linhart  1968).

In each site the  pine  is restricted to the  coastal-fog  belt. The inland spread  of the  pine  halts  abruptly  where the finest individual  specimens appear  (Peattie  1950).  In  areas  where the  pine  is  planted,  it  has  naturalized only  where  fog drip  is  heavy,  as on the  ridges  of the  Berkeley  Hills. Some authorities assert that the  pine  forest is a fire-climate  ecosystem only  on sandy  loam soils of the coastal  strip (Roy 1966);  others  believe that there are no reasons  why  the forests could not extend farther  inland  (Mason 1934;  Vogl  and others  1977).  The  pine requires  cool summers and wet, mild winters,  conditions found  along  the  coasts of the southern  temperate lands.

The  rapid  naturalization  of the  pine  in other  countries  confirms those observations. In New  Zealand it was introduced at the end of the 1850s to  provide  windbreaks and shelters on the  Canterbury  Plains. New Zealand  pine plantations  now exceed one million hectares,  and the tree has naturalized and continues to  spread among  the native  vegetation.  The pine  has also been  adopted  in  Spain,  Australia,  and South  Africa.  In  Spain it  grows  more  rapidly  than do native  pines,  and it thrives on the Atlantic coast from  Portugal  to the  Pyrenees.  In Australia it was  introduced in 1878,  but  early plantations  suffered dieback in the continent's  impoverished soils.

The limitations of the  pine  first became  apparent  in Australia,  when the  fungus Diplodia  pinea  attacked  plantations  in  Queensland.  The  pine appears  to have little  resistance  to  fungal  attack  where summers  are  warm and thunderstorms  are  common. South  African  experience  confirmed  the

unsuitability  of the  pine  in such conditions. It  was  planted widely  in the 1920s,  but an attack of  Diplodia  damaged many plantations.  The  fungus epidemic  was  especially  severe in areas with  hail  damage,  a constant threat  in the  high  veldt, where rain comes in violent thunderstorms and hail is  frequent.  The  pine  is better suited to the Mediterranean-climate area of  the western  Cape  Province, where  it  grows  rapidly  and well. Disease heretofore  has been a  problem only  in warm inland areas.  In the persistently  mild climates of coastal Chile the  pine  achieves its  highest growth  rates.

Chilean  experimentation  with  exotic  trees  began  shortly  after the conquest  of the Araucanian  frontier.  The  Mapuche finally  surrendered  in 1881. In 1890 Arturo  Junge,  owner of a  plant nursery  near  Concepci6n, received  Monterey pine  seeds from  Germany (Krebs  1973).  Trials  of the new  species  were successful in the  Concepcion  area,  and naturalist  Federico Albert  spread  word and  seedlings among  the  plantation  owners on the coastal  hills  overlooking  the mines. Worried  about timber  supplies  as the coastal forest neared  exhaustion,  Cousifo  planted pine  and  eucalyptus on the  company's  cleared  land. Pine  proved  too weak for  mine  timber; eucalyptus  withstood  greater  stress,  and its audible  creaking  before failure  gave  miners  warning  of  impending collapse. Although pine  failed as mine  timber, its  rapid growth  and  long  fiber  suggested  other uses  in construction and  papermaking. By  1935  pine  had been  planted  on  25,000 hectares of land,  mostly  on the hills above Lota.  Successive  governments adopted  the forest sector as a national  project:  plantation  area increased from 15,000  hectares in the 1940s to almost 80,000  hectares in the 1980s (Gomez  and  Echefique  1988; Wisecarver and  Tardones 1989; INFOR 1991).

Sixty  years  of reforestation  have transformed  south-central  Chile from a  landscape  of eroded wheat fields and  pastures  into an industrial  pine forest.  Pine  plantations  have become the  dominant,  and often  only,  forest type  in coastal Chile from the Rio Maule to the Nahuelbuta  Range.  The pine  achieves its fastest  growth-to a  height  of  thirty  meters in  twenty years-in the coastal  ranges  immediately  north  and south of  Concepci6n. Growth is slower in the interior  valleys,  but it still is more  rapid  than  that of native trees. The lower  valley  of the Rio Bio-bio is  packed  with  pine plantations  to the Andean foothills.

## ECOLOGICAL  EFFECTS OF PLANTATION  FORESTRY

Monterey pine  forests in their natural  range  in California  are  largely single-species,  even-aged  stands,  commonly originating  as a cohort of seedlings  that  sprouted  after  a  wildfire. Most  Chilean  plantations  are  also extensive  stands of  uniform  age  and  species,  but the resemblance between the two ends there. In its natural form Pinus radiata may  live 150 years;  in  plantations  the oldest  tree is  approximately  25  years.  In both

volume and  height  the tree  grows  most  rapidly  in its second decade. Its growth  rate then decelerates, and at as  early  as 40  years  the  rotting  of heartwood exceeds the annual increment  of new  growth.

The  paradigm  of  plantation forestry  combines theories of  optimal forest rotation and detailed  quantitative  studies of the life  cycle  of the tree. It  prescribes  monoculture,  careful  pruning  and  thinning,  and  early harvest. The  highest  possible  return on  investment remains the  paramount  goal,  but within that  constraint  the  paradigm  is  constantly changing.  Trees are thinned twice to allow the  premier specimens light  and space  to  grow,  and  they  are  pruned  to  promote  vertical rather than spreading growth  in order  to concentrate  a tree's  resources  on the trunk. Pruning  also  interrupts  a tree's  knot-forming response  to branch  decay, which  produces  valued knot-free  logs.  The  pine  reaches the  peak  of its mean annual increment in 18 to 24  years;  at that  point  the  plantation  is clear-cut.  Selective  cutting  is not  practiced,  because the  Monterey  pine  is a  pioneer species,  whose  seedlings grow  best in full sun.

The elimination of herbaceous  vegetation  is crucial  during  the  early years  of  plantation  establishment,  when the  seedlings'  roots are shallow and most vulnerable to  competition  for moisture and nutrients. As the pines grow they  cast a  deep  shadow  over the  soil,  and the  buildup  of needles  suppresses  the  growth  of  a herbaceous  layer.  The  understory becomes drier,  and the  pines, entering  a  stage  of  extremely  rapid growth, transpire  moisture at a rate much  greater  than do  pasture,  wheat fields, and native forest,  which reduces stream  flow in downstream areas.

Pruning,  thinning,  and  harvesting  create  a  large  amount  of brush  with no  apparent  use. Sometimes it is left on the forest  floor,  but most of it is burned after the  logs  are harvested.  Experimenters  in Chilean universities have  proposed  a  range  of uses for  the  litter,  but  pine  needles and  twigs have resisted  exploitation.  Only  fermentation  seems to break  them  down, so the most  promising  use is as  silage,  fed to  sheep  too  hungry  to  object.

Sheep,  and  livestock  generally,  mix well with  recently  established  pine plantations. Grazing  animals avoid  pine  needles but  effectively  control most native  vegetation,  which  competes  with the  young pines  for moisture and nutrients.  Silvopastoralism  allows for more intensive landuse that  improves  both the forest soil and the health of the flock  (Sotomayor 1989),  but it has  yet  to be  adopted  in most  plantation  areas.  Another form of  symbiosis,  that between  tree roots and  fungi,  is  also  a  frontier of research in exotic  forestry:  foresters have obtained excellent results  by inoculating  nursery  seedlings  with mushroom  spores.  The  fungal  mycelia and tree roots  merge  to form  mycorrhizae  that aid in the  uptake  of soil minerals  (Donoso  1990).  The mushrooms that  sprout  under the  pines have become one of the few  secondary products  obtainable  from timber plantations.

Environmental  protection  was  among  the  goals  of the Forest Law of 1931, which  initially  subsidized  plantation forestry,  but Chileans have never reached a consensus on  why  the environment is to be  protected.  A sharp  debate still  rages  over whether the  pine  has furthered  the destructive transformation  of the Chilean  landscape  or has created a new ecological  benefit.  One side  of  the  debate laments the destruction of  the bosque  maulino,  a rare native forest  type;  the other side  rejoices  in  the reclamation  of  low-grade pastureland  and the retardation  of soil erosion. For one side the issue is the loss of the  original landscape  and  wildlife; for  the other  it is the return  of  ravaged  and  marginal  land to  economically productive  use.  Bosque  maulino once  grew  on the windward  slopes  of the coastal  range  between  Concepci6n  and Constituci6n.  Like  the coastal forests in California, it is a relict forest in an area with  a seven-month drought  and  survives  only  in  small  pockets  where  marine moisture moderates the summer  dryness.  The  only  intact forests are  preserved  in parks  south of Constituci6n and contain four of the six  species  of Chilean flora in  danger  of imminent extinction  (Hoffman 1991).

According  to the  large forestry companies,  the  ecological  balance of plantation forestry  is  positive  (Giiell 1990).  Of the more than  850,000 hectares of  plantations along  the  coast, some 50,000  hectares  were established  directly  after forest  clearing. Against  that loss are the deforested and eroded hills converted to  plantation.  In  the coastal  range  most forests were converted to wheat fields more than a  century ago  and were  caught in a  cycle  of erosion under dense rural  populations.  Estimates  of the area of land suited for  plantations-that is,  currently  without forest cover but ill  suited  for  agriculture  or  grazing-range from two  million  hectares (CORMA  1991)  to seven million hectares  (Susaeta  and Benedetti  1990). Either  figure  leaves  ample space  for further  reforestation  on  open  land.

The reestablishment of tree cover on eroded land does  reduce the amount of soil loss. There is little or no soil loss under  pine,  because the canopy  and the needle  layer intercept  the  raindrops.  Erosion  can  become a serious threat  after  the  pines  are  harvested. Most landowners burn the needles and branches after the  clear-cutting,  which leaves a thin blanket of  ashes  on the soil.  The soil  loss  during  the  following  year  has been measured at 35 to 566 tons  per  hectare  (Otero 1990).  Even a  figure  as extreme as the latter,  occurring  once in  twenty years,  could be  compared favorably  with the cumulative loss over the same  period  from  an eroded pasture.  A denuded and  overgrazed  hillside without forest cover is the likely  alternative in  most zones  where  plantations prevail.  Pine-influenced soils show  pH  levels  comparable  to those of  degraded pasture  soils; both are more acidic than native forest soils. Pine  requires  less  nitrogen than do annual  grasses  and so can  grow  in  poor sandy  soils,  if certain trace elements like boron are  supplied.

Most Chilean  ecologists  are concerned not with  the  present,  when most  plantations  are  still in their  first  rotation,  but with the future  of soils after several  generations  of  pine.  Tree  farming  removes fewer nutrients than does  agriculture,  if the  bark,  twigs,  and  leafy  material  are retained on site. Plantation  soils in the second rotation  are  on  average  0.3  pH  more acidic than in the  first rotation  (Susaeta  and Benedetti  1990),  but  the results  vary greatly,  depending  on what is done with the discards.  Wholetree removal  depletes  soil nutrients more  rapidly  than does  harvesting the trunk alone. A sustainable,  though  not  steady,  state can be achieved when  organic  residues are left untouched and the  logging  rotation is lengthened  to  mimic  the  ecological  rotation-the time  necessary  for natural  processes  to  return a  deforested site  to  its  condition  prior  to clearing.

Such visions of  ecological sustainability  have not been welcomed  by Chilean industrial foresters. The  ecological  rotation is not  applicable  to many  exotic  species,  which  may  initiate an  entirely  new succession without natural  parameters.  The end of a natural rotation in a  pine  forest is often  brought  on  by  fire.  Chilean foresters  deplore  the fire hazard  posed to the next rotation  by  the dense  pile  of  dry  branches.  They cheerfully sacrifice the  long-term  condition of the soil for the medium-term reduction in risk  by burning  all detritus before  replanting.  The  agricultural traditions of Chilean  peasants may  have more to do with the  pervasive use of fire in  forestry  than does  any  economic  calculation,  but the risk of fire  is not to be dismissed. A central  tenet in the  argument  that  plantation forests take the  pressure  off natural forests is that the former should be managed  to maximize  yield,  not to mimic the latter  (Pielou 1988;  Heilman 1990),  and that all  practices  which increase  yields  are  acceptable  in order to reduce environmental  degradation  in distant forests.

Because  pine  is a  crop,  not a  forest,  the  many  cumulative-effect scenarios are  ignored.  Few Chileans believe  that natural  processes  can or should be re-created on  plantation  land, and the  oft-repeated warning that slash  burning  wastes nutrients  is  ignored.  Declines in  yield  have not yet  been  reported  in Chile. Most Chilean foresters also eliminate native vegetation  whenever  possible.  The  practice  may  be essential  during  the early years  to ensure the  rapid growth  of  seedlings,  but a mature  pine plantation,  after  pruning  and  thinning,  admits filtered  light  to the understory,  where native trees often  emerge.  Roble  (Nothofagus obliqua)  and avellano  (Gevuina avellana) saplings  are  especially  common under  pine. This  layer  could be  managed  to  grow  into the next harvest but is  usually burned instead, generally  to  plant  more  pine.

In  search  of economies of  scale,  foresters  also eliminate most  ecotones, which would  provide refuge  areas  of  high biological diversity.  The  diversity  in small-mammal  populations  in coastal  matorral compared  with  pine plantations  is attributed  to the former's  complex, heterogeneous  struc-

ture with various niches and food sources (Mufi6z  and Muruia  1989).  In contrast, a  pine plantation  offers  only pine  bark, needles, and seeds,  as well as an occasional mushroom. Most mammals avoid  pine plantations, but some thrive there,  and foresters  now confront  increased  populations of the few wild animals  that  have  adapted  to life in the  pines.  For  the time being,  Chile has matched animal  adaptations  with chemical  poisons.  But the hazards of reliance on  pesticides  are  apparent  in the  emerging  insect threats  to the  Monterey pine.

## MONOCULTURE  AND RISK

Monoculture is both an  advantage  and a risk in  plantation forestry. Dense  stands  of  the  same  species  at the  same  age  offer a  large  and concentrated  supply  of raw materials for  nearby processing operations. Reduced  transportation  costs allow the  development  of  pulp  and  paper industries that  require large  volumes  for efficient  operation.  Plantation silviculture is  simple: training  is  straightforward;  experience  is  gained rapidly;  and  problems  are  quickly  identified. Monoculture offers economies of scale and concentration,  and conventional wisdom states that the ecological  risks  are  outweighed  by  the  higher  returns  (Evans 1982). Single-species  forests are  not uncommon in  nature;  accordingly,  the issue is not whether exotic  plantation  monoculture is vulnerable but whether it is more vulnerable than is natural monoculture  (Gill 1984).

The critical  weakness of  plantation  monoculture  lies not in  single-species,  single-aged  stands but in  genetic uniformity.  Some  species,  like the Monterey pine,  do not survive  in a  great  reservoir of land races from which  the  forester can select  the  hardy  and the  resistant individuals. Studies  of  the  pine  in  its  three California  refugia  show  little  genetic variability;  most  pine  plantations  are even  less  varied and thus more vulnerable than are  pine  forests. The  populations  on the  Guadalupe  and Cedros islands show a  variety  of  pine  rather  different  from  the California pines  and  may prove  to be  a reservoir of  genetic  diversity  for future breeding (Libby,  Bannister,  and Linhart  1968). However, seed selection and  cloning  on the Chilean timber  plantations  have decreased  genetic diversity  and increased risk.

If  an  enterprising  insect  develops  a taste  for  one  Monterey  pine,  it  will find that all other  Monterey pines  taste  just  as  good.  As a relict  species, the  pine  has few  pests  of its  own,  but the abundance  of other  pine species guarantees  that  there  will be no  shortage  of  organisms  adapted  to  feeding on similar  plants.  If such an  organism  evolves  in or is introduced into a genetically  uniform  population  of trees,  spread densely  over kilometers of  countryside,  often to the exclusion of other  species,  the results could be  devastating.  For  many years  Chile was  spared  such  plagues  while the pine  enjoyed  the  complete  freedom from  pests  that exotic trees often enjoy during  their first  decades in a new locale. Local  insects subsisted in

the  pine plantations,  but none reached  epidemic proportions (Donoso 1990).

On the evidence from other countries, the  Monterey pine  is not immune to  epidemic  infestations. The  pine-needle  blight  has  destroyed many pine plantations  in Brazil, Zimbabwe, Kenya,  and northern New Zealand.  The  same  organism  in California  is a  nuisance  but  never a threat. In  tropical  summers the nuisance becomes  epidemic  and  effectively  excludes the  Monterey  pine  as a  plantation  tree  where such climates  prevail (Zobel,  van  Wyk,  and Stahl  1987).  The  dry,  cool summers in Chile  apparently provide  the ideal climate for the  pine's growth,  but  Diplodia  pinea has  damaged  some of the northernmost  plantations  in  Chile, where the average temperatures  exceed 20?  C in the summer.

The  European  shoot moth  (Rhyacionia buoliana) is the latest threat to the  plantations.  It  appeared  in North America  as  early  as 1914  and  spread to  pine plantations  in  Argentina  and  Uruguay  several decades later.  Its larvae feed on the shoots of  many pine species  and often kill the leaders of  saplings  between one and ten  years  old. Measures for its control have failed,  in  part  because it is concealed for much of its life  cycle. Only  the erratic,  twisted  growth  of the  normally  vertical  leader  reveals  its  presence in  the  pine.  The adults live  for less  than one  month.  They appear  in mid-spring  to  lay  their  eggs,  and two weeks later the larvae hatch and immediately  burrow into the  young  shoots. Hidden and  invulnerable, they  eat until the  following spring. Warnings  about the moth first circulated in  1985,  when it was detected in the foothills of the Andes southeast of Osorno  among  the southernmost  pine plantations.  Chileans  concluded that it  probably  entered the  country  on a truck from  Argentina.  Aerial spraying  and a  quarantine  on the  transportation  of  pine  branches failed to curtail its northward  spread. By  1989 the shoot moth had  spread  to Loncoche  (Aguilar  and Beeche  1989),  and the  Corporaci6n  de Madera advised  against planting pine  in the infested zone.  In December 1991 specimens appeared  in  pheromone traps  near  Concepcion,  the heart of the  plantation country (El  Mercurio 1991).

Given  the  potential  scale  of  the  damage,  Chilean  foresters  have searched  feverishly  for some means of control. Several insecticides kill the moth in tests  (Cerda,  Aguilar,  and Beeche  1988),  but the  spraying  of lethal chemicals  over south-central  Chile  is  fortunately  not on the  agenda. The infested  area includes at least 400,000  hectares of  Monterey pine; between  50,000 and  60,000 hectares are  severely  affected  (Revista  del Campo  1991).  The vast area  of  pine plantation  leaves  biological  control  as the  only  alternative.

Chilean  foresters  and  entomologists  have resolved to learn  to live with the shoot moth. Native insect  predators  failed to control it, so Chileans have introduced  yet  another  exotic  species, Orgilus  obscurador, a  wasp  of European origin  that is selective in  choosing  a host for its  young  and

parasitizes  only  larvae  of  the  Rhyacionia  genus.  It has  been  released throughout  the infested areas,  with  promising  results.  Within  three  years more than one-half of the shoot-moth larvae that  were collected had been parasitized (Revista  del  Campo 1991).

Biological  control has reduced the threat of sudden  epidemic,  the chief risk  posed by  the shoot moth. At current levels  it is a small  cost, not a serious threat. It  may  reduce the  productivity  of  pine plantations, but  only by  a little. In  the  long  term,  however, there  can be no assurance that the moth or other  pests  of the  pine  will  not  grow suddenly  from a mild irritant into a  devastating plague.  Chile in  many ways  is blessed for  pine  cultivation  by  its isolation and its  cool,  dry summers, but the former  may  not last forever. The  question  of  ecological  sustainability remains undecided,  but the risks are  mounting  as the monoculture of pine plantations  intensifies.

The level of  damage  in infested  plantations  is still unknown. Near La Uni6n  damage by  the moth was  increasing  at an annual rate  of 6  percent, although  some  damage  was  recoverable  (Alvarez  and Ramirez  1989). When that rate of loss is  projected  over a  seven-year period,  the number of  trees  damaged by  the moth is  no  greater  than the number cut for thinning  under current  plantation-management practices.  If infestation levels remain  at a  manageable  rate,  thinning may  shift from  a  mechanism to ensure the most  rapid growth  of the healthiest  specimens  to a  prophylactic measure to control the  spread  of the insect.  Thinning  to control disease will  promote plantation  growth  almost as well as  thinning  for  any other  purpose.

The record of disease in exotic  plantations compares favorably  with that of native  forests.  Indeed,  the most severe  damage among singlespecies  pine  forests  has  come  in  the  native  Pinus caribaea  woods  of Honduras  (Zobel,  van  Wyk,  and  Stahl  1987).  Other infestations  that reached  epidemic  proportions  resulted  from the  spruce  budworm  in northeastern North America and from several  pine-bark  beetles in the southeastern  United  States  (Franklin  and  others  1989).  In  Chile  no severe  losses  have  yet  occurred, and  pessimists'  predictions  have not been confirmed.

Foresters  hope  to  keep  ahead of the evolution and  dispersal  of  potential  pests  through  research into methods of control both chemical and biological.  The  application  of  pesticides  over  large  areas is  increasingly impractical  as well  as  expensive  and ineffective.  Biological  control will be the  preferred approach  in the future. It in turn will  depend  on the documentation of  biological  diversity  among  insect  predators  and of their interactions  with  plants,  a field of research  that is in its  infancy  and relies in turn on the  preservation  of the  dwindling  remnants of natural forest in which the interactions  still occur.  The  preservation  of  biological diversity  in  old-growth  forests  could thus be essential to the maintenance

FIG.  2-Timber plantations  and  indigenous property  in the  study  area.

<!-- image -->

of  plantation  forests. Plantation  forests can relieve the economic vulnerability  of natural  forests;  natural forests will be  necessary  to relieve the ecological vulnerability  of  plantation  forests.

## SUSTAINABILITY  AND  POSSIBLE  ECOLOGIES

The  goal  of sustainable  development  has attracted  support  from all parts  of the  political spectrum,  because the term has come to mean all things  to all  people  (Lele 1991;  Worster  1993).  In Chile it is invoked to justify  the conversion of  old-growth  forests to tree farms  (Hartwig 1991) as well as the  opposition  to  any  forest  clearing.  The  underlying disagreement is over what is to be sustained:  timber  production,  corporate  profits, employment, ecosystems,  or rural  communities. The Chilean  plantations are successful on the first  two items but less so on the third.  Global  forest industries show  a  strong tendency  toward  capital-intensive  innovation that substitutes  technology  for labor to increase timber  yields  without increasing employment (Laarman  and  Sedjo 1992),  and the Chilean industry  is no  exception.  In  regard  to the fourth  item,  plantations  in some areas are  necessary  but not sufficient for  sustaining  intact  ecosystems  in other areas. The most difficult  problem  remains the final item-social sustainability,  which I address in the remainder  of this article.

The  bias toward  large-scale,  single-use plantations  is  strong:  they  offer economies of scale, concentration,  and  simplicity,  especially  in  regeneration and worker  training. They  lend themselves to the maximization of timber  production. Secondary uses,  especially noncommodity ones, are difficult to measure or to  capture.  The  amenity  value of most forests for human recreation  and  enjoyment  probably  exceeds their  value as  timber, but it is difficult  to realize  amenity  value as economic  gain (Anderson  and Leal  1991).  The  benefits that  forests  provide  as  carbon  storage  and  wildlife habitat  accrue  to  people  at a  great  distance.  Forest  owners face  a  free-rider

The Chilean  plantation industry currently  threatens to  displace  the rural  population  through single-minded  promotion  of  the  plantation paradigm.  The  conversion of Arauco  Province  to  pine  has been  accompanied  by  the dissolution of tenant  farming  and the creation  of rural  shantytowns inhabited  by displaced peasants. Only  the  Mapuche reservations, especially  in  Cautin Province, remain  agropastoral preserves (Fig. 2). Under the terms of the  Mapuche surrender,  local clans held reservation lands in common and could not sell them. The  military  regime  converted the common  holdings  into individual  plots,  and the  lands are  now  eligible for transfer.  The  regime apparently  calculated that the  breakup  of the reservations would  force the  Mapuche  into  social  differentiation and capitalism (Babarovic  and others  1987).  The most  likely outcome, however,  is not a  gradual  evolution of the  Mapuche  into  capitalist  farmers  and agricultural  workers but a wholesale  displacement  of both  by  tree farming.

problem  in  attempting  to  capture  these  benefits  for  their own  gain. Individually  the owners have an incentive to maximize timber  production,  but  collectively  the  industry  and rural inhabitants would  benefit from an alternative  to the  plantation  model.

Regional  specialization  in Chilean  forestry  has  already  placed  resident farmers  at a  disadvantage.  The conversion of  large  landholdings  to  plantations has reduced  peasant  access to the  products  of the environment. Owners have excluded the rural inhabitants from  plantations  as a fire hazard, and cases of  pesticide  poisoning  both of livestock and  people have been  reported (Cavieres  and other  1986).  The  high consumption  of water  by  a  rapidly growing pine  tree reduces water flow  during  the  dry season;  reductions of  organic  matter  and  capacity  to retain  moisture in a soil  level  may  also  lead  to  increased  flooding  during  the  winter. For example,  in one area  planted  to  pine  80  percent  of the  peasants  noticed changes  in the water  supply  within five  years (Rivera  1988).  The dissolution of  tenancy,  combined with the  single-use plantation  model and strict enforcement of  private-property rights,  has increased  emigration  from the  plantation  zones and has diminished the  quality  of life for the  people who remain.

The issue  facing  Chile is the modern enclosure movement in which corporate profit  maximization, intensive  landuse,  and enforcement of restrictive  property  rights place ever-larger  portions  of the  landscape  off limits  to  poor  rural inhabitants. The return of  existing  plantations  to peasant agriculture  is  politically  unthinkable  in  contemporary  Chile,  but with suitable modifications the future  expansion  of commercial timber production  can  complement  and  strengthen present-day landuses,  not supplant  them. Rather  than  replacing  the  populated  rural  landscape  with plantations, fast-growing  trees can be  integrated  into the  existing  landscape  to aid  peasant producers  whose land is most in need of  protection and  recuperation.

The  ecological  risk cannot be  eliminated,  but  it  can be  mitigated through  diversification and  spacing. Currently  most Chilean  plantations are monotonous  agroindustrial landscapes  of  young  pines  in  endless rows.  Many plantations  are  enormous:  the  average  size of a  plantation  in Bio-bfo is  1,321 hectares, or more than 13  square kilometers, and the average  size of each coetaneous stand is 87 hectares  (Otero 1989).  Those averages  are  highest  on the windward  slope  of the Nahuelbuta  Range, the heart  of the  plantation  belt.  Ostensibly  the most economical  use of the land, gigantic plantations  raise the  probability  of disastrous  epidemics  or fires that  could  spread rapidly  in such a uniform environment.

Small, separated groves  of trees would  reduce the risk of  epidemic infestation, provide  more ecotones for  greater variety  of  wildlife,  and avoid  many  of the  problems  of  large-scale  monoculture. Plots no  larger than 26 hectares,  with one hectare harvested each  year  in a  twenty-six-

year  rotation, would  provide  steady employment  in an  industry  with notoriously  uneven labor  requirements  (Otero  1989).  Some  forestry  companies  now  accept parts  of this model. Forestal  Anchile  designs  its eucalyptus  plantations  around  existing  patches  of  native  forest,  which  it maintains as a  phytosanity boundary (Chile  Forestal 1990).  Nevertheless, the  company  remains committed to  single-use plantations;  rural  inhabitants and their  multiple  forest uses are  not welcome. In a modification of the  plantation paradigm,  benefits  would  be  greater  still  if  the  establishment of a small-scale  plantation  did not involve the  displacement  of the resident  population  or  the exclusion of their  other  economic activities.

The  peasant plantations  should follow the  agroforestry  model, which combines livestock  grazing  beneath  strips  or  groves  of trees  with existent household  activities.  To decrease risk and  to  increase  biological  and landscape diversity,  these  groves  should not be  single species.  The risks are  multiple:  an attack  by  the shoot moths, a  glut  of  pine  on the local  log markets,  or a downturn in world demand for  pulp  and  paper.  Intercropping  does not diminish the risk that one  species  will be attacked,  but it does reduce the chances  of  complete  loss. Furthermore,  research  suggests that  the  intercropping  of different  species  can  yield higher  overall  growth rates than will  single species  alone  (Diaz 1989,  19-21).  A mosaic of small plots  allows for  greater  protection  from disease and for the maintenance of  fragments  of the native  ecosystems  in combination with exotic trees. The task for  forester-ecologists  is to  expand  the niches for wildlife  in a completely  humanized environment.

The model  of  peasant  as tree farmer holds  advantages  for  forestry corporations.  The outreach  program  of Forestal  Temuco  distributes seed packets  free to farmers to  encourage  them to establish  hedgerows  between their  pastures.  The  program  is  experimental  but holds  great  promise. The farmers  are  under no  obligation  to sell their  trees  to the  company, but the increased  supply may  lower the  regional price,  and the contact

Scattered  groves  and  hedgerows yield  lower returns  than do concentrated  plantations,  but as additions to an  already  extensive forest  resource they  offer a better ratio of reward to risk. The mosaic model assumes an occasional loss to  pests,  but it reduces the chance of infestation  by  allowing  for  predators.  Plantations  normally  have no niche for  raptor  species, but variations in the  planting pattern  can  improve  conditions for them. For  example, by clearing  corridors in an otherwise uniform  plantation hunting  conditions  were  improved  for  foxes  and  owls  (Muo6z  and Murua 1990).  The  ubiquitous dogs  and cats of the  typical peasant  farm aid the  process. Many  of the rewards of the  agroforestry  model,  specifically improved subsistence,  will not be reflected  in measurable  economic returns.  They  will contribute  mostly  to the  quality  of life and to  reducing the risk of  epidemic  infestation, an  advantage  that will  be  appreciated only  in the event of  catastrophe.

and the  goodwill  generated  will  probably  earn it the  privilege  of first purchase  at  market  price.  The  program  also  allows  the  company  to increase its  projected supply  without  expending  scarce  capital  on  the purchase  of land.

Agroforestry  is  commonly  envisioned  as  a  strategy  for  improving subsistence and farm  fertility through  diversification in  woody  species, often  nitrogen-fixing  ones.  Synergy  between trees  and other  crops  ideally raises the  yields  of both.  Agroforestry  is  remarkably  good  at  improving eroded and infertile  land and at  enriching  subsistence  diets,  especially  in the  production  of  fruit-bearing  perennial  crops  in the  tropics.  Its  Achilles' heel is the  inability  to do what  peasants repeatedly  assert  they  want to do: earn more  money,  the need for which  pervades marginal regions  of peasant agriculture.  Many  of the  tropical  fruits  produced  in  agroforestry projects  have no  ready  market,  and the  gap  is  large  between the  production of the fruit  and its successful  preservation,  transportation,  and marketing  as an exotic  commodity.  Timber-based agroforestry  in Chile  would provide  a more  dependable  cash  crop,  because the market  already  exists, and the  peasants  of the  region  have seen it in  operation  for  years.

The exotic timber trees  planted  in Chile do not conform to the traditional  agroforestry  model. Neither  pine  nor  eucalyptus significantly  improves  soil  fertility;  eucalyptus may  even  degrade  it,  although  evidence is  lacking  (Raison 1984;  FAO  1986). They  are not ideal  species  for the restoration  of  damaged ecosystems  in Araucania.  Their  primary  ecological benefit is that  they  will  grow  well on land where few other trees will grow  at all.  Specifically,  both can  grow  in  exposed  subsoil and maintain soil structure  on  steep slopes,  characteristics  that  fit  much  Mapuche  land. Pine and  eucalyptus  need not be sited on  cropland.  Most  Mapuche  land is devoted to diversified livestock  production,  and the addition of trees to be sold for lumber could be described as  silvopastoralism.

Other  fast-growing species  are available to fulfill the usual  requirements of  agroforestry species.  The  intercropping  of several Australian wattle  species  increases  yields  of timber  trees,  improves  soil  fertility,  and provides forage  and firewood. For  example,  the Australian  blackwood is a  nitrogen-fixing  tree tolerant of salt and mild frost, with  protein-rich leaves  suitable for  forage.  It is  partially  shade tolerant and  grows  well under  eucalyptus;  the  golden-brown  hardwood burns well and fetches a good price  as lumber.  The silver wattle has similar  properties, although it  has  less  potential  as a  commercial  hardwood. Both  are  useful in  arriving at  a  mixture  of  species capable  of  maximizing  overall  yields  from  a  variety of  crops.

Pine,  properly  managed  and combined  with other  species,  can  sustain an  expanding  forest  industry, help  to  protect  natural  ecosystems,  and provide  smallholders with a cash  crop.  These  species  need  not, and in many  cases should not,  be native:  exotics cannot  be considered  destroyers

of nature  when  they  are  used to rehabilitate  degraded  land to  productive use. Other factors  being equal,  native  species  are  to be  preferred,  but the other factors  are  not  equal:  specifically,  no Chilean  species  can match the rapid  growth  of  pine.  Mapuche  landuse  has  not  in  itself  meant  the preservation  of native flora:  exotic trees are  important  in  Mapuche  subsistence.  Only tiny pockets  of the coastal native forest remain,  and most Mapuche  farmsteads  are  planted  with exotic  trees,  especially along property  boundaries. It  is common to find entire  farms  without a  single  native tree  or  shrub.  The  blue  gum  and the  Monterey  pine  serve as both fuel and lumber. No  farm is  without  a  hedgerow  of  Monterey cypress,  which produces  rot-resistant  wood for  fence  posts,  small  boats,  and  other  objects in contact with moisture. The  Mapuche  have been  quick  to  adopt  introduced  tree  species,  just  as  they  have  adopted  introduced  crops.  Few indigenous plants grow  on their  farms,  except  for herbs  cultivated in the medicine  gardens  of  some  older farmers. With the  exception  of  these invaluable medicinal  storehouses,  sustained smallholder  forestry  is  likely to  require  the introduction of additional exotic  species,  not an  attempt  to re-create  the  indigenous ecosystems.

## CONCLUSION

Chilean  experience  with exotic  species  has not been  uniformly positive. The  reproduction  of some, like hares and rabbits,  has been  prolific and uncontrollable.  Nevertheless, many  exotics have  proved  worthwhile additions to the  Mapuche repertoire  of  plants  and animals. On  balance, exotic timber trees are a  high-value crop  that  people  will harvest as  long as  they  use wood and make  paper.  In  Araucania  they grow  on lands  long since  stripped  of their native forest. Remnant  old-growth  stands of the Valdivian  forest  should be  preserved  wherever  they  are  found, but scrub and  young  second-growth  do not warrant  protection  at the  expense  of development.  In  Mapuche  lands the  question  is not whether humans have altered the  landscape  but whether  contemporary  alterations will change  the  landscape  for better or for worse. The  proposed  alterations would create an inventionist  landscape  that combines  greater  ecological diversity  and  improved  economic return.  Such  an  approach  would create in a  degraded  land the economic base of cultural survival.

Exotic  species  will not  disappear.  Timber  production  and rural  communities can be reconciled,  if Chileans  will consider  multiple-use irregular silviculture. Plantation  forestry  has created an  engine  of economic growth  in  a  marginal region  that  provides  wealth  for some  and  the promise  of honor and  security through  the  power  that  wealth  brings.  But the benefits of economic  growth  are  distributed  unevenly: they  will reach more Chileans  if  rural smallholders  are included  in  the  industry  as producers  rather than  excluded  as  competitors  for  land.  Small-scale timber  production  can  supplement existing plantations  and buffer the

risk of  catastrophic  disease,  at the cost  of  sacrificing  some  economies of scale.  In return,  they  will  contribute  diversification, multiple  use,  and  a more  attractive,  livable  landscape.

## CITATIONS

- Aguilar,  A.,  and  M. Beeche. 1989. Current situation  of  the  European  pine  shoot  moth  (Rhyacionia buoliana  [Schiff.]  Lepidoptera:  Tortricidae)  in Chile.  Insects  affecting  reforestation:  biology and damage,  eds.  R. Alfaro and  S. G. Glover,  155-160.  Victoria, B.C.: Pacific  Forestry  Centre.
- Alvarez,  G.,  and 0.  Ramirez. 1989. Assessment  of  damage  caused  by European pine  shoot  moth  in radiata  pine  plantations in  Chile.  Insects  affecting reforestation:  biology and  damage,  eds.  R. Alfaro  and S. G. Glover,  145-154.  Victoria, B.C,:  Pacific  Forestry  Centre.

Anderson,  T.,  and  D. Leal. 1991. Free market environmentalism. Boulder, Colo.: Westview  Press. Babarovic,  I.,  P.  Campaia, C. Diaz,  and  E. Duran. 1987. Campesinado  mapuche  y procesos  socioecon6micos regionales, documento de  trabajo  34.  Santiago, Chile:  Grupo  de  Investigaciones

- Agrarias.
- Cavieres,  A.,  G. Martner, R. Molina,  and  V. Paeile. 1986. Especializaci6n  productiva,  medio  ambiente,  y migraciones:  el caso  del  sector  forestal  chileno.  Agricultura  y  Sociedad  4:31-95.
- Cerda, L.,  A.  Aguilar,  and M. Beeche. 1988. Insecticidas  para  el control de  Rhyacionia  buoliana  (Schiff) (Lepidoptera: Tortricidae): ensayo  de laboratorio.  Bosque  9(1):61-63. Chile Forestal. 1990.
- CORMA  (Corporaci6n  de  Madera). 1991. Chile,  pais  forestal.  Santiago,  Chile:  CORMA  Departamento  del  Bosque  Nativo.

Diaz.  M. 1989. Chile Forestal  158.

- Donoso,  C. 1990. Ecologia  forestal. 2d ed.  Santiago,  Chile: Editorial Universitaria. El Mercurio. 1991. 12 December.
- Evans, J. 1982. Plantation  forestry  in the  tropics.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press.
- FAO (U.N.  Food  and  Agriculture  Organization). 1986. Are  eucalyptus  ecologically harmful?  Unasylva 152(38):19-22.
- Franklin, J. D.,  T.  Schowalter,  M.  Harmon,  A. McKee,  and  T.  Spies. 1989. Importance  of  ecological diversity  in  maintaining  long-term  site  productivity.  Maintaining  the  long-term  productivity of Pacific Northwest forest  ecosystems, eds.  D. A.  Perry  and  others,  82-97.  Portland,  Oreg.:  Timber Press.
- Gill,  G. M. 1984. Monoculture  and  site  productivity.  IUFRO  symposium on site  and  productivity of fast  growing  plantations,  vol.  1. Pretoria: South  African  Forest Research Institute.
- G6mez,  S.,  and  J. Echenique. 1988. La  agricultura chilena:  las  dos  caras  de  la  modemizaci6n. Santiago,  Chile: FLACSO-AGRARIA.

Guiell,  G. 1990. Politicas  forestales:  una visi6n  del  sector  privado.  Santiago,  Chile: CORMA.

- Hartshorn,  G. 1983. Ecological  implications of  tropical  plantation  forestry.  The  comparative economics  of  plantation  forestry,  ed.  R.  Sedjo,  84-93.  Washington,  D.C.: Resources  for the  Future.

Hartwig,  F.  1991.

Chile: desarrollo  forestal  sustentable.  Santiago,  Chile: Editorial Los Andes.

- Heilman, P.  1990. Forest  management challenged in  the  Pacific  Northwest. Journal of  Forestry 88(11):16-23.

Hoffman,  A. 1991. Flora silvestre  de  Chile: zona  araucana. 2d ed.  Santiago,  Chile: Claudio  Gay. 1991. Estadisticas  forestales  1990. Boletin estadistico  15.  Santiago,  Chile.

- INFOR (Instituto Forestal). Krebs, J. 1973. Monterey  pine:  an  introduced species in  Chile.  Ph.D.  dissertation, University of Colorado,  Department  of  Geography,  Boulder. Ann  Arbor:  University  Microfilms.
- Laarman, J.,  and  R.  Sedjo. 1992. Global  forests: issues  for six billion  people.  New  York: McGrawHill.

Lanly, J.  P.  1982. Tropical  forest resources.  Forestry paper  30. Rome: FAO.

- Libby, W., M. Bannister, and Y. Linhart. 1968. The  pines  of Cedros  and  Guadalupe islands.  Journal of  Forestry  66(11):846-853.
- Lele,  S. 1991. Sustainable  development: a critical review.  World  Development  19(6):607-621.
- Mason,  H. 1934. Pleistocene  flora of the Tomales formation.  Washington,  D.C.:  Carnegie  Institution. Muno6z,  A., and R. Murua. 1989. Efectos de la reforestaci6n  con  pinus  radiata sobre la diversidad  y abundancia  de  los  micromamiferos  en  un  agroecosistema de  Chile  central.  Turrialba  39(2):143150.
1990. Control  of small  mammals  in a  pine  plantation  (central Chile) by  modification  of the habitat  of  predators (Tyto  alba,  Strigiforme and  Pseudalopex sp.  Canidae). Acta  Ecologica 11(2):251-261.

Otero,  L. 1989. La silvicultura  como  factor del  desarrollo.  Ambiente  y  Desarrollo  5(1).

1990. Desarrollo  regional  y  medio  ambiente:  interacciones  entre  la sociedad regional  y  su entoro forestal  en  la  regi6n  del  Bio-Bio.  Acci6n  ambiental:  obstaculo  o  impulso al desarrollo? Serie documentos  de seminario,  sector forestal 6-7  Julio. Santiago,  Chile: Centro de  Investigaci6n y  Planificaci6n  del  Medio  Ambiente.
2. Pielou,  E. C. 1988. The world  of northern  evergreens.  Ithaca, N.Y.: Corell University Press.
3. Peattie,  D. C. 1950. A natural  history  of western  trees. Boston:  Houghton Mifflin.
4. Raison,  R.  J. 1984. Potential  adverse  effects  of forest  operations on  the  fertility  of soils  supporting fast  growing  plantations, vol.  1. Pretoria: South  African  Forest Research Institute.

Revista del  Campo.  1991. 30 December.

Rivera,  R. 1988. Los  campesinos chilenos.  Santiago,  Chile: GIA.

- Sedjo,  R. 1983. The  comparative  economics  of  plantation  forestry. Washington,  D.C.: Resources  for the Future.
- Roy,  D. 1966. Silvical  characteristics  of  Monterey  pine.  U.S. Forest Service  research  paper  PSW-31. Berkeley,  Calif.: Pacific Southwest  Forest and  Range Experiment  Station.

Sotomayor,  A. 1989. Sistemas  silvopastorales y  su  manejo.  Chile  Forestal  documento tecnico  42.

- Susaeta, E.,  and  S.  Benedetti. 1990. El  sector forestal y  la  conservaci6n ambiental. Ambiente  y Desarrollo 6(2).
- Vogl, R.,  W.  Armstrong,  K.  White,  and K.  Cole. 1977. The closed-cone  pine  and  cypresses.  Terrestrial vegetation of  California,  eds.  M. Barbour and  J. Major,  295-358.  Sacramento:  California  Native Plant  Society

Worster,  D. 1993. The wealth  of nature. New  York:  Oxford  University Press.

- Wisecarver, D.,  and S. Tardones. 1989. El sector  forestal  chileno:  politicas, desarrollo  del  recurso  y exportaciones. Ciencia e  Investigaci6n  Forestal  3(6):1-22.
- Zobel,  B.,  G. van  Wyk,  and  P.  Stahl. 1987. Growing  exotic  forests.  New  York:  John Wiley  &amp; Sons.