<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Rural Place Attachment in Hispano Urban Centers

Author(s): Jeffrey S. Smith

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 92, No. 3 (Jul., 2002), pp. 432-451

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/4140919

Accessed: 24-01-2016 16:59 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## RURAL PLACE  ATTACHMENT IN HISPANO URBAN CENTERS*

## JEFFREY S. SMITH

ABSTRACT. Continued  rural-to-urban  migration  has  helped  motivate  cultural  geographers, long suspected  of  having  a rural  bias,  to include urban areas  in their  purview.  Patterns  of gender,  class,  ethnicity, and commercialization  have  proved  to be fertile  subjects  for  research, but the elastic  links  between rural  and urban  places  are  not  yet  well understood.  Hispanos, despite  intense  feelings  of  loyalty  to their  rural villages,  moved en masse  to cities  in the  1940s. By  the  1950s  a  majority  of  Hispanos  were  living  in  regional  urban  centers  of the  upper  Rio Grande  country,  where  wages  were  higher  and  employment  was secure.  This  Hispano experience  is a crucible  for  examining  how urbanites' attachment  to rural  places  is manifested  in various cultural  expressions  brought  from  country  to  city: painted  murals,  burial  preferences, popular music, and  irrigation  ditches.  Understanding  threads of rural  culture that have  been  incorporated  into the urban  fabric  in turn leads  to clearer  comprehension  of the emotional attachment  that urbanites  have for rural  areas  and a better  appreciation  of the complexity  of the urban  cultural  environment.  Keywords: Colorado, Hispanos,  New Mexico, rural villages, urban place attachment.

Since  the end of World  War  II,  American  cities have  attracted  ever  greater  numbers  of new residents  in search  of diverse  employment  opportunities  and  amenityrich  environments.'  Since  the  early  198os, Atlanta,  Denver,  Houston,  Las  Vegas, Salt Lake  City,  and Phoenix have  consistently  topped  the list of the  fastest-growing urban centers  in the United  States.  With  surrounding  lands  being gobbled  up  at a rate of more  than  an  acre  an  hour,  rapid  urbanization  is  coming  at  a  heavy  environmental  and  social  price  (Stoel  1999; Theobald  2001).  As recent  news headlines  assert,  for many people  cities have become a  stress-inducing,  inhospitable,  and  impersonal environment with  polluted air,  rampant  road  rage,  heinous hate crimes, sprawl, and traffic  congestion (Muir 1999).  Cities are  popularly  perceived  as the root of many  a social ill.  Conversely, rural  areas  are  regarded as warm and  friendly  places where  one can  escape  the urban  jungle  and find  peace,  solace,  and comfort  (de  Wit 1997;  Jakle  1999).  As sanctuaries  that  possess  restorative powers,  rural  places  have become an  idyllic  retreat  from the  "increasingly urbanized and  fast-paced  world beyond"  (Wyckoff  and Dilsaver  1995,  4).

One  way  urbanites  deal  with the  "evils" of  living  in urban  centers  is  by incorporating  nonurban  practices into their  daily lives.  Just  as  the  romanticized  country  life centers  on  reclaiming the  purported  serenity  of nature,  rural  small-town  places  can offer a  nurturing,  extended-family  atmosphere  where residents  personalize  their relationships and  forge  strong  ties  to  place  (Jakle 1999).  Living  in a  city  can  be more tolerable  when one is surrounded  by  reminders  of the  presumably  peaceful,  caring, wholesome virtues  of a rural  lifestyle  (Little  1999).  A link  between  rural  and urban

* I  gratefully  acknowledge  Kevin  Blake's assistance  with earlier  drafts  of this article.

*  DR.  SMITH is  an assistant  professor  of geography  at Kansas  State  University,  Manhattan,  Kansas 66506-2904.

places  is evident, then, in  my exploration  of rural  place  identification  among  urban-dwelling  Hispanos  in  Albuquerque,  Espafiola, and Santa  Fe,  New Mexico,  and in Pueblo,  Colorado.2

## LANDSCAPE ANALYSIS MOVES  TO  THE  CITY

American  cultural  geographers are  renowned  for their  meticulous examinations  of the built  environment (Wagner  and Mikesell  1962;  Norton  1989;  Foote  and others 1994;  Myers  and others  forthcoming).  For  decades  geographers with a cultural  focus have also  interpreted  patterns  of  ordinary  cultural  landscapes  (Meinig 1979a; Groth and Bressi  1997),  including  the work of such well-known scholars  as Peirce Lewis  (1979), Donald  Meinig  (1979b), J.  B.  Jackson  (1984, 1994),  Allen  Noble (1992), Wilbur  Zelinsky  (1992), and  Terry Jordan, Jon  Kilpinen, and  Charles  Gritzner  (1997). The  majority  of these "traditional" pieces  have focused on the attributes  of rural, folk,  or  preindustrial societies.  As  James  Duncan  (1990)  and others  have  acknowledged,  the  methodologies  and  corpus  of  knowledge  advanced  by  this  approach  to cultural  geographical research  have  provided  a solid foundation and a tested  set of axioms on which the future  of the  subdiscipline  can be built.

Increasing  urbanization,  however,  combined with a call for the  application  of more  socially  grounded  and  theoretically based  investigations, is  precipitating a  shift in the research agenda  of  today's  largely "new"  cultural  geographers  (Cosgrove  and Daniels  1988;  Jackson 1989;  Cosgrove 1993,  1994;  Duncan  and  Ley 1993;  Holdsworth 1993; Duncan  1994;  Mitchell  1994).  Social  interaction  in urban  and industrial  places helps  drive  the  research of some  present-day cultural geographers  (Ley  1996;  Hayden 1997; Wheeler  1998; Peach  2002).  Furthermore, the  1990os witnessed  a  growing  number of scholars  who  explored  the  complexity  of urban centers  (Muir 1999;  Myers and others  forthcoming), especially  those who  sought  to understand  the role of landscape  in the  development  of culture  (Mitchell  1994; Wheeler  1998).  Interpreting  urban  patterns  of  ethnicity (Arreola  1994;  Ruddick  1996;  Wood 1997;  Li  1998), gender  relations  (Hayden  1981;  Watson  1986; Spain 1992;  Fincher and  Jacobs 1998), employment  and class  (Mitchell  1993; Blake  and  Arreola  1996;  Bondi  1998;  Hiebert 1999),  social and  political  economy (Harvey  1989;  Zukin  1995; Mitchell  1996;  Warren  1996;  Kloosterman, Van  der  Leun,  and  Rath  1999),  and  development,  consumption, and commercialization  (Kenny  1995; Smith  1996)  is  proving  to be a rich area for research. Of  growing  interest,  especially  among  the  postmodern  and  poststructuralist  geographers, is  analysis of  social-spatial contestations  in urban  settings  (Mills 1993).  The  amalgamation  of  contemporary  cultural  geographical  studies affirms that  values,  ideologies,  and  identity  are  all  meaningfully  represented in the  socially constructed  landscape.  Unfortunately, as the laments of a chorus of scholars  indicate, we have done  little  more  than  scratch the  surface in our  attempt  to  comprehend the  complexity  of urban culture  (Parsons 1994;  Wheeler  1998;  Mitchell  1999).

As  increasing  numbers  of  cultural  geographers  reposition their  research  endeavors and move from examinations  of rural locations  to cities, a  gap is opening  in the  body  of  literature.  The  ongoing  blurring  of  rural and  urban  culture  requires

that more work  be done at their interface  so we can more  fully appreciate the link between  rural  and urban  places  (Rigg  1998).  A few  years  ago  Urban  Geography Editor  James  Wheeler  issued  a call  for  manuscripts  that focus on the interconnections between rural  and urban  places (1998).  His words reflect  the  growing  realization that  only through  such  scholarly  endeavors  will we  improve  our  understanding of how urban cultural  landscapes  are  constructed.  Others  agree:  "A  more substantive understanding  of  landscape  ...  cannot  focus on the  country  or on the  city,  but must incorporate  the mutual definition and relations of both"  (Olwig 1996, 645).  The discord  between  "traditional"-largely  rural-and  "new"-predominantly  urbancultural  geographical  approaches  only  serves  to limit scholars'  scope  of research. An effective  way  of  decoding  the hidden  meanings  within the  complexity  of urban centers  is to examine  more  closely  the various  interlinkages between rural  and urban  places.  "As  a cultural  construct,  the  meaning  of the  city  can be  deciphered  by closely examining  its  complex relationship  with the culture  of which it is a  part" (Domosh  1992, 475).  A clearer  appreciation  of  links between  rural and urban  culture  will better  inform us about the urban  experience.

## PLACE ATTACHMENT

Even  through  the late  1970s  cultural  geographers  devoted  relatively little research energy  to  understanding  how  place knowledge  is  organized  or to  capturing  the emotions  that  people  develop  about  places  (Wright 1947;  Tuan  1977;  Sopher 1979). Yi-Fu  Tuan  stepped  up  to the  plate,  publishing  two treatises  in which he  explored attachment  to  place.  He introduced  the  concept  of  "geopiety," the intersection  of devotion  to  place  and  one's  native  land  or  country  (1976). This  helped  readers  grasp a reverence  for home. Then, in  Space  and  Place,  Tuan  explained  the  concept  of a homeland as  "an  archive  of fond memories  and  splendid  achievements  that  inspire the  present;  place  is  permanent  and hence  reassuring to  man,"  and "the  more ties there are  [to  a  place],  the  stronger  is the emotional  bond"  (1977,  154,  158).

These two works broke new  ground  in  comprehending  how  deep  emotional attachments  to  place  develop.  Since  then,  however,  interest  among  cultural  geographers  in  people's  strong  attachment  to  place  has  been intermittent.  One  example  of research  in the Tuanian  mode is Ben  Marsh's acclaimed  work on anthracite  mining towns in northeastern  Pennsylvania  (1987).  Marsh  explains  that,  despite  endemic poverty  and economic  collapse,  residents  refused  to leave  their  home communities because  of their intense  bonds with the  place  and their  sense of rootedness.

By  the  mid-199os  the  body  of  geographical  literature  on emotional attachment to  place  had  advanced  considerably. After  monographs  by  Alvar  Carlson  (199o)  and Richard Nostrand  (1992)  and  a session  at the  1991 meeting of  the  Association of American  Geographers,  a special  issue  of  the  Journal of  Cultural  Geography,  later reworked into book  form, was devoted  to the  concept  of homeland.  Guest editors Richard Nostrand  and Lawrence Estaville Jr.  found  scholars who  could  persuasively argue for the  emerging  homeland  concept  and  discuss  their  research as examples (1993,  2001). Although  some  culture  groups  bond  with  a  place  more  readily than do

others, consensus  among  the  contributing authors  is that the  most  important ingredient  in  the  development of  a  homeland is  deep  emotional attachment  to  a place  (Arreola 2001; Conzen  2001; Jett 2001;  Jordan-Bychkov  2001; Nostrand  and Estaville  2001;  Schnell  2001).

The homeland  concept  is  significantly  improving  our  appreciation  of the  deepseated  feelings people  have for a  place.  Even  though  Nostrand  and Estaville's  anthology  is a  significant  addition  to homeland  literature  (2001), additional  geographical accounts  are needed.  As Richard Muir  concludes,  "Often the  significance  of  place and the  meanings  associated  with  [that place]  lie at the core of a  person's identity," yet  "much  concerning  the  relationship  between  people  and  places  remains  poorly understood"  (1999, 274).

Dolores  Hayden recognizes  that scholars from various  cognate  fields are also examining  place  attachment.  "[E]nvironmental  psychologists ... define  place  attachment  as a  psychological  process  ..,  .and suggest  that  place  attachment  can  develop social,  material and  ideological  dimensions,  as individuals create  ties to kin and  neighbors,... and  participate  in  public  life as residents of a  particular community"  (1997, 112).  Place attachment has also been  incorporated  into the research  agendas  of  many sociologists  as  they try  to  explain  the  power  of human connections  to  places  that  may no  longer  exist;  for  example,  to  neighborhoods that have been  obliterated  by  urban renewal  (Hayden 1997).  Some  scholars have even  argued  that more research should be conducted  on the need to  belong  to a  particular place  from a  biologically  based perspective  as it  incorporates  the  concept  of  territoriality  (Muir 1999).

Cultural  geographers  obviously have  no  monopoly on  the  study  of  place  attachment,  but we should  be  capitalizing  on  our  unique  perspective  on  landscape analysis  to further understand the  deep-seated  ties  people  have for  particular places. "When  [people's]  experience of  other  places  suggests  that  some  familiar  things at home  may  be  distinctive,  these  become symbols  of home"  (Sopher  1979, 137). Cultural  geographers are best  qualified to  read  the  "symbols of  home,"  especially  as  they  are manifested in  ordinary  landscapes. Few  geographical  studies have  provided evidence  of  the  extent  to  which  urban  residents  bond  with  rural places.  More  geographers  need  to  analyze  the urban  landscape  for the  strong  emotional attachment  city  dwellers have for rural areas.  Using  the  Hispano  urban  experience,  this  study  reveals some  of  the  symbols of  the  interplay  between  rural and urban  places  and will,  I  hope,  further our  comprehension of the  complexity  of the urban structure.

## HISPANOS OF THE  UPPER RIO  GRANDE

Early  New Mexico scholars  quickly  concluded  that, for  Hispanos,  the  community in which  they were born and raised is the most  meaningful  aspect of their lives. In 1954 John Burma  wrote  that  it  is  impossible  to  overemphasize  the  importance of  the home  village  to  Hispanos.  He stressed that individuals  are identified  first and foremost  with  their  community of  birth,  and  loyalty  to  that  community reaches a degree unknown  in most of the rest of the United  States. Little has changed: The home

community  is still  central  in the  lives  of  Hispanos  (Martin  2000).  As  Nostrand  concluded  in  1992,  no other  place  is as  meaningful  to them as  their  native  village.  Two popular  New Mexico  publications  have  further  captured  the essence  of  allegiance to  place.  The  September  1997  issue of New  Mexico  Magazine featured  an article  on La  Querencia  (which  was  roughly  translated  as "the  place  of  your  heart's  desire")

FIG. 1--Hispano  place-names  referred  to in the text.

<!-- image -->

(Fauntleroy 1997). For  Hispanos, in a  term  borrowed  from  bullfighting, the  querencia is the  village  in which  they  were  born and raised,  the  place  where  they  feel completely  at  home and  know  they  belong.  A second  publication, La  Herencia  del  Norte, has  periodically featured  letters  to the  editor  under  the  subtitle  "Hogar  dulce  Hogar" (Home  Sweet  Home).  Contributors explain  what  makes  living  in their  New  Mexico village  special  to them.  Because  of the  unequaled  bonds that  many  of them  express

for their  rural  villages  in northern  New Mexico and southern  Colorado,  Hispanos make an ideal culture  group  for  examining  the ties urban  residents  have for rural places.

Before  the  1940s  Hispanos  were  principally subsistence  farmers  and  ranchers. As Sarah  Deutsch  documented,  even  though  numerous  Hispano  men took  jobs  as  itinerant  laborers  in the  potato  and  sugar-beet industries  of northern  and  central  Colorado,  they always returned  home to their  small  village  (1987). In  the  1940s,  however, despite  deep  attachment to  home,  Hispano  families began  moving  to  regional  urban centers  that  offered  higher-paying jobs.  By  the  mid-195os a  majority  of all  Hispanos were  living  in the urbanized  areas  of  Albuquerque, Phoenix, Denver,  and,  closer  to home, Pueblo, Espaflola,  and Santa Fe  (Nostrand 1992).  Because of  the  feelings Hispanos  have  for  family  and  village  roots,  many  former  residents  continue  to own rural  property, to which  they  return  on weekends,  holidays,  and  vacations  (Carlson 1990; Smith  1997;  Martin  2000). Furthermore, aspects  of  Hispanos' lives  that  remind them of the rural  village  ideal  have  become  particularly meaningful.

To  explore  the  ways  in which  Hispanos  have  incorporated  their  extraordinarily deep  emotional attachment  for rural  areas  into their  city  lives,  I amassed  evidence during  seven  years  of fieldwork  and informal  interviews  throughout  the rural  villages  and urban  centers  of New Mexico  and southern  Colorado.  In  the summers  of 1998  and  1999  and the fall  of  2000 I  systematically analyzed  the  landscape  in Albuquerque,  Espahfiola, Santa  Fe,  and Pueblo  (Figure  1).  In addition  to commercial  districts,  my  field observations  of  public space-places  where  the  landscape  has been influenced  by  a  community  of  people-focused on  Zip-code  areas  in which, according  to the  1990  U.S.  census,  a  plurality  of residents  were  Hispanos.3  The accuracy  of  my  personal  observations was  verified through  numerous  informal  interviews with  key  informants,  including  housewives,  retired  couples,  employed  and unemployed  or disabled  residents,  business owners and directors,  business  employees (both  male and  female),  scholars  from local  colleges  and  universities,  and  government officials.  Extensive  daily  notes, photographs,  and sketches  documented  my findings  and  allowed  me to  synthesize and  distill  the  information  I  gathered. I  found four  areas  that  show  urban  Hispanos'  strong  ties  to rural  areas: murals,  mortuaries, music,  and  acequias  (irrigation  ditches).

## MURALS

From  the  preservation of historic  buildings  to the creation  and  designation  of  public  landmarks and  memorials,  people  mark  their  heritage in a  variety of  ways.  Highly visible  features,  such  as  Mount  Rushmore,  the monuments  in  Washington,  D.C.,  or, tragically, the World  Trade  Center  towers,  hold  public significance  and serve  to enhance  people's  sense  of  place  (Tuan 1977; Foote,  T6th,  and  Arvay 2ooo;  Godfrey 2002). On  a less  grandiose  scale,  ethnic  groups  personalize  their  landscapes,  emphasizing unique  traits and elaborating their shared identity  (Ford and Griffin 1981). Features  on  the  landscape  consolidate shared  meanings and  build  community (Duncan  and  Ley 1993).

The creation  of  public  murals  is a common method  whereby  Hispanic  populations enhance their  community identity.  These  expressions  of vernacular  art not only promote  community pride,  cooperation,  and  stability  but also  signal  the  presence  of a  particular ethnic  substrate within the  larger urban  center  (Ford  and  Griffin 1981; Hayden  1997). After  an  extensive  examination  of murals  in San  Antonio,  Texas, Daniel Arreola  concluded that  painted  murals are a visual  landscape  artifact  that supplements  oral  tradition:  " [B]y  re-creating and  projecting  images  of well-known ... personalities  as well as historic events ... murals serve as mnemonic devices" (1984,  414-417). As Arreola  explains,  in the absence  of written  records,  murals  that adorn  public space  are  an  enculturating  medium that  strengthens  group memory.

Hispanos  of the  upper  Rio Grande  region recognize  that  public  murals have long  been a  popular  form of cultural  expression  among rural-dwelling  residents. Many  rural  Hispano  communities contain artistic  renditions  that adorn  the landscape  of both  private  dwellings  and  public space.  Similar  idealized  scenes  now  appear  in urban  centers  with a  large  Hispano  population.

In San  Luis,  Colorado,  for  example,  a  mural  painted  by  the  well-known  regional artist  and  sculptor  Carlos  Sandoval  graces  a wall  in the heart  of the small  community (Figure  2).  The mural  depicts regional  cultural  traditions,  Hispano farming life,  and a bountiful  goodness  of the earth.  Crowning  the mural are  the crucified Christ  and four  Spanish  conquistadores  in full armor.  This section is  particularly laden with cultural  meaning,  not  just  for  religion  but because  the  conquistadores signify  the  important  distinction  Hispanos  make  between  themselves  and all other people  of  Hispanic origin  in the United States.  Equally  impressive  is a mural in remote Truchas,  New Mexico,  that carries  viewers from the  top  of the  Sangre  de Cristo Mountains-the  principal  mountain chain of New Mexico and southern Colorado  along  the Rio  Grande-down the  valley  to the  religious  mecca  of  Chimay6 (Figure  3).  Embedded  in the scene are  locally  prominent  physical  and cultural  features.  Another  mural,  in San  Miguel,  New  Mexico,  honors the local  Catholic  church and the  important  role it has  played  in residents' lives  by portraying  major  figures and events in the life of the church  and the  community (Figure  4).  For  the ruraldwelling  Hispanos  who live  in communities  such  as  these,  murals  consolidate  shared meanings  by reminding  them of the richness  of their lives  and their  cultural  traditions.

In the Atrisco  suburb  on  Albuquerque's west side,  murals  serve  a similar  purpose.  A  enduring  and common mural  theme,  even in this  metropolis  of more than half a million  people,  is the rural  village  ideal.  Residents  of the Alamosa  neighborhood of Atrisco  were  having  a  particularly difficult  time  fighting  gang  activity  and graffiti.  One resident,  who  prefers  to remain  anonymous, explained  to me that the community  responded  by bonding  together  to  promote  a cleaner, safer environment.  Even more  significant,  neighborhood children  and adults painted  murals on perimeter  walls  depicting  positive  aspects  of their lives, around which  other members of  the  community could  rally. Although  many  of  the  murals  have a  religious connotation, one  noteworthy  panel  depicts  a small  village  at the base  of what  are

FIG. 2-Carlos  Sandoval's color mural  in San  Luis,  Colorado,  depicts  various  aspects  of life in the rural  community;  in the middle  top panel  are  the crucified  Christ  and four  Spanish  conquistadores. (Photograph  by  the author,  September  2000)

<!-- image -->

unquestionably  the  Sangre de Cristo  Mountains  (Figure  5).  Brought  into the  city  is the home  village,  a not  entirely  abstract  ideal  in which residents  can find  comfort and  security.

A second mural  in Atrisco  features  a  bucolic  scene  from  the forlorn  Santa  Clara Cemetery.  Completed  in  1999  by Leopoldo  Romero,  the  painted  mural  depicts  an idealized  view of a small town with two  prominent  churches  and  adjoining  cemeteries  (Figure  6).  The ideal reconnects  to a lost or distant  past  and  suggests  that eternal peace  and  happiness are  achieved only  when  one's  final resting  place  is  among the rustic  hills  of home.  Equally telling  is  how  the  mural  has  been  treated: By  the  fall of 2000 some sections of it had been scaled  off,  and  graffiti  had been added.  The idealized  rural  scene,  however,  had been left unblemished.

## MORTUARIES

To be buried behind a  cemetery  wall similar  to one  they  remember  in the small village  where  they  were  born is  simply  not  enough  for some  Hispanos:  They  want to be interred  at  the  actual  site  of their  family's roots.  Among  the  greatest  challenges in  identifying ties  between  rural  communities  and  urban  centers  is  overcoming links that tend to be  profoundly  personal  and therefore  all but invisible.  So it is with burial  practices  of  family  members.  As cultural  spores,  cemeteries  are  a  landscape artifact  that houses a wealth of information.  Physical  anthropologists  long  have

FIG. 3-A  view of the  Sangre  de Cristo  Mountains  from  Truchas, New Mexico,  and the  rolling  hills in the  vicinity  of  Chimay6,  as  portrayed  in a color mural in Truchas.  (Photograph  by  the author, September  2000)

<!-- image -->

FIG. 4-The  center  of this color  mural  in San  Miguel,  New  Mexico,  shows  the  community's Catholic church.  On the left  is  the crucified  Christ  at  night;  on the  right  is  the  Virgen  de  Guadalupe in  daylight. (Photograph  by  the author,  September  1997)

<!-- image -->

FIG.  5-A  color mural on the  perimeter  wall of the Alamosa  neighborhood  in  Albuquerque,  New Mexico,  depicts  a small  village  at  the base  of the  Sangre  de Cristo  Mountains,  next to the Rio Grande. (Photograph  by  the author,  September  2000)

<!-- image -->

known that  burial  grounds  are  indispensable as a tool for  uncovering  the secrets  of a local  culture.  Unfortunately, cemeteries  reveal  little  about  the last  known  place  of residence  of the deceased;  such information  goes largely  unreported  on  cemetery headstones.

Graham  Rowles  and Malcolm  Comeaux  assert  that  "post-death  migration"  or long-distance  shipment  of human  remains,  is  strongly  correlated with  people's  attachment  to  place  (1987). Their  evidence  shows  that,  cross-culturally, people aspire to be laid  to rest  in a  place  for  which  they  hold a  particular affinity. Often  they  call that  place  "home." For  some  people,  home is their  place  of  birth;  for  others,  a  place where  significant  events  unfolded  during  their  lifetime.  For  most  Hispanos,  home is  unquestionably the  village  of their  family's roots.  With  few  alternatives available, I used data  from  interviews  with  mortuary  directors  to track  final  journeys.

In  the  commercial  districts  of the cities  I  examined,  numerous  mortuaries  serve local  needs.  The  funeral  homes,  however, tend  to be  commercially  segregated, based on  ethnicity.  In  Espafiola, for  example,  the Block-Salazar Mortuary  provides  most of the  burial  services  for  local  Hispanics.  According  to monument consultant  Alicia Duran,  slightly  more than 20  percent  of Block-Salazar's business  relates  to  people who want  to be interred  in their  hometown  cemetery  (1999).  In  these  situations,  the mortuary  typically  arranges two services: one at  the  mortuary for  family  and  friends

FIG.  6-Santa Clara  Cemetery, in the  Atrisco  suburb  on the  west  side  of  Albuquerque, a color  mural on the  perimeter  wall,  painted  by Leopoldo  Romero  in  1999,  that  portrays rural  houses  and  two community  churches  with headstones  surrounding  them.  (Photograph  by  the author,  September  2000)

<!-- image -->

who live  in  the  Espafiola-Santa Fe  area, and  a  second,  graveside, service  in the  smalltown  cemetery.  Duran  explained  that most of their out-of-town business  is in the small  villages  of northern  New Mexico  and southern  Colorado.

In  Pueblo, Colorado,  of the twelve mortuaries  that offer burial services,  the Romero  Family  Funeral  Home is the  recognized  leader  in service  to the local Hispanic  population.  Director  Larry Romero  informed  me that  nearly  15  percent  of the services conducted at his  mortuary  are for families whose relative  wished to be buried  in their  hometown  cemetery  (1999).  For  the Romero  Family  Funeral  Home, the  majority  of their  nonlocal burials  serve  Hispanos  who lived  in Colorado's  San Luis  Valley, a rural  Hispano stronghold  (Smith  1999).

## FOLK  MUSIC

From  highbrow  classical  to the  pulsating  rhythms  of  rap  and  bebop,  music  is one of the  purest  forms of cultural  expression. Music  plays  an  integral  part  in  expressing tastes,  preferences, fears, and  fantasies. It  serves as  an  effective means  by  which  memories of a  place  are  recalled.  Since  the  1970s  a  growing  number of cultural  geographers  have  interpreted  the  geography  of  music. As illustrated  by  the  carefully composed  overviews  by Lily  Kong  and  by  Peter  Nash  and  George  Carney, as  well as a  special  issue  of the  Journal  of  Cultural  Geography, music research  has become extensive and varied  (Kong  1995;  Nash and  Carney  1996;  Carney  1998).  One of the

more  popular themes  has  been  the  interpretation of  place  identity in  music,  mostly in either rock  and  roll  or  country music  (Curtis and  Rose  1983;  Carney 1990o, 1998; Kong  1995). For  example, Louis  Woods  and  Charles Gritzner's content  analysis of country music  concludes that  a  portion of the  genre  portrays nostalgia and  yearning  for  a  simpler way  of life  (1990).  People's disenchantment with urban  living, especially among  uprooted migrants, leads  to  homesickness for  the  rural landscape and  an  agrarian lifestyle. Woods  and Gritzner conclude  that  country music  is a symbolic reminder and  expression of desire for  a  past time  and  a  distant place.

For  many ethnic  groups music  is  a  vital  source  of  subcultural identity. Unfortunately, place-specific analysis of ethnic  music  has  been  largely ignored  by  geographers  (Curtis and  Rose  1983). As  Carney laments, "[our]  geographic knowledge of ethnic  music  is  practically nil  despite the  fact  that  anthropologists, folklorists, and ethnomusicologists have  for  years studied variations in  both  rural and  urban  contexts." "Where," he wonders, "are  the  geographical studies  on the rich  and  variegated music  traditions of the  Hispanic Southwest, French of southern  Louisiana?" (1998,  5).  Still  more  surprising is  that  geographers have  all  but  overlooked how  ethnic music  perpetuates social  identity, strengthens a  group's perception of  space, and  helps  maintain cultural or  ethnic  ties  to a  place  (Kong 1995).

In  traditional rural Hispano  communities, music  accompanies a  large part  of village life.  From  the  melodious hymns  of church, to the  ballads sung  during holidays and  family celebrations, to  the  Penitente chants, music  adds  flavor to  Hispano culture. It  is  at  community celebrations, however, that  music  strikes a  special chord. According to  the  local  writer Nasario Garcia, feast-day celebrations, with  their  music and  dancing, are  especially important events  in the life of the rural  Hispano community (1999). Historically  each  village typically supported  three or four musical  groups  that  played at  these  special social  events.  Some  of the  more  talented  groups  gained  a  regional  reputation and were  paid  to travel  to  nearby villages to  play.  Today the tradition of small  bands  and  musical groups  in rural Hispano villages continues.

Described as  a  blend  of  Spanish guitar and  German polka  music, Hispano  songs have  a  clarity and  heartfelt tone  that  distinguishes them  from  other  Latin American music,  including  Tejano music  (Welsh  1999).  A more  defining  characteristic of Hispano music  is that  most  songs  are  corridos (musical folk  tales).  Many  Hispano corridos can  be traced to medieval Andalusian verses  and  ballads brought over  by colonial  Spaniards (Herrera-Sobek 1993). Corridos have  always been  a traditional Hispano  way  of  expressing feelings and  an  important way  of  disseminating newsworthy information (Lopez  1999; Chivez-Bent and  Sanchez 2000). Today some  of the  most  popular Hispano  corridos are  tales  about  life  in rural  New  Mexican villages.

When the famed Hispanic  songwriter Micky Cruz left New York  City after high school,  he  began  his career by playing  for audiences  throughout  New  Mexico.  Before he played for Bo-Diddley  or founded  Cruzin Records, Micky recounts, Hispano audiences asked him to quit playing those other songs  and play the traditional  songs

everyone  loved  (Lopez 1999).  "So  [he]  went to a record store and  bought  some  tapes to learn traditional  songs  from New Mexico  so  [he]  could  keep  his  job" (p. 45).

Urban-dwelling  Hispanos  continue  to  yearn  for traditional  corridos  that  are rooted in the rural areas.  As one  of more than  sixty  radio stations  in the  Albuquerque  and  Santa Fe  listening  area, public  radio  station  KANW has  helped  meet  that demand  with  its New  Mexico  Spanish  music  format.  The  station  plays songs  that are  representative  of the music  traditionally  found  in the  villages  of northern  New Mexico.  According  to  Program  Director  George  Welsh  Jr.,  all of the  Hispano  music aired on  KANW is written  and  performed  by  local  New  Mexico  artists  (1999).  The station's  policy  is that  any recording  sent in will be  played  on the air at least once,  no matter the level of  talent. Welsh indicates  that  many  of  today's  older  New  Mexico residents  enjoy  singing,  playing,  and  listening  to  the  traditional  songs  they  heard their  parents  and  grandparents sing  as  they  were  growing  up.

Since the introduction  of its current format in  1973,  the station  has  enjoyed  tremendous  success.  Intermixed  with  news  and  personal  dedications,  the  time  slot between  5:00 A.M.  and  3:00  P.M.  each  Saturday  has the  highest  overall  ratings  in the listening  area;  no  time  slot  captures  a  larger  share of listeners  in the  Albuquerque and Santa Fe  metropolitan  areas. Like other  public  radio  stations,  KANW conducts semiannual  fund-raising  campaigns.  Because of its  overwhelming  popularity,  however,  it  has  been  able  to  scale  back  the  semiannual  fund-raisers  and  supplement them with a  single campaign  held one  Saturday  each  year.  In  eight  hours the station is able to raise more  money  than it does  during  the other two  campaigns  combined (Welsh 1999).

Another  source of revenue for the station  is its sales of cassette  tapes  and compact  discs of the more  popular  New Mexico  Spanish songs.  Filled with sixteen  songs, volume  1  sold more than io,ooo  copies  between  1997  and  1999.  In the sixteen months after volume  2 was released it sold well  over  8,000  copies.  By  2002 the  station  was offering  its  eleventh  volume  and  had  lost  count  of  total  sales. A  wide variety of songs  make  the  cut,  but  those  about  local  New  Mexico  villages are some  of  the most popular. For  example, Paul  Pifio sings about  "Las Estrellas  de  Nuevo Mexico,"  Steve  Ortiz  has  a  song  titled  "Que  Viva  New  Mexico,"  and  one  of  Roberto  Griego's  most  recognized songs  is "Arriba Nuevo Mexico."  The  popularity  of  these  artists  is due  in  large part  to  the  fact that  they  sing  about  small  New Mexico  towns  with  which  listeners  are  intimately familiar. Welsh  says  that  people simply  cannot  hear these  songs  enough;  they  constantly call  in  to  request  them (1999).

In an  attempt  to further  capitalize  on the  appeal  that  Hispano  small towns  have for  listeners,  in  1998  KANW erected  a  relay  tower  in  the  far northern  New  Mexico village  of  Questa.  Located 150 miles  north  of  Albuquerque,  Questa's  200ooo population  was about  1,8oo00. By adding  to  its extensive  network  of  relay towers,  KANW  is able to  effectively  link  rural and  urban residents  throughout the  northern  part  of the state. More  important,  during  Questa's annual  feast-day  celebration  KANW has aired a "live remote" from  the  town.  All  of  the  day's events  are broadcast  to  the

FIG.  7-The  pastel-colored  mural  on the  west-facing  wall of  Acequia  Madre  Elementary School in Santa  Fe,  New Mexico.  Painted  by  Frederico Vigil  in  1989,  the scene includes  a  community  acequia,  a butterfly, a  hummingbird,  a man  catching  fish,  women  dancing,  and two men  irrigating a  field;  in the center  is an  overflowing basket  of fruits  and  vegetables.  (Photograph  by  the author,  September  2000)

<!-- image -->

urban  listening  audience. Through  the live  remote,  Hispanos  who live  in two of the state's largest  cities  are  able  to maintain  ties to the rural village  ideal.

## ACEQUIAS

In the semiarid  climate  of the American  Southwest  few  things  are  more  important to the survival  of a  community  than a  dependable  supply  of water.  Colonial  Spaniards  quickly  recognized  that ditch  irrigation  is one of the most effective  means  of diverting  spring  snowmelt  and summer rains  to  croplands.  Construction  of community  acequias  began  immediately after  settlements were  established. The  acequias and their lateral  ditches took  years  to  complete  and still  require  year-round  collaborative  maintenance  by community  members  (Smith  et al. 2001), but  today's crops  are  watered using  the  same  acequias the  Spanish  forebears used.  Thus  acequias have  served  for  generations as  a  literal  lifeline  for  rural  Hispano  villages,  permitting residents  to  cling  tenaciously  to an otherwise  inhospitable  environment.

Although  the seasonal  rhythm  of ditch  irrigation  and the  enduring cycles  of planting  and harvest  seldom touch the lives  of  city-dwelling  Hispanos,  the  importance of rural  acequias  has not been  forgotten.  In urban  Espafiola and Santa  Fe, local  people  have  commissioned  works  of art  that  remind  them  of the  role  of  acequias in  Hispano  culture.

On the  campus  of Northern  New Mexico  Community College,  in  Espafiola, a Monumento de  Acequias  is dedicated  to  acequias  in honor of their  significance in

FIG. 8-"Acequia," a  sculpture  completed  in  2000 by  Tim Hooton and  on  display  in the New Mexico Capitol  Annex,  is of a man  opening  an  acequia  headgate,  thereby  allowing  water  to flood a  parched field.  (Photograph by.the author, September 2000)

<!-- image -->

traditional  Hispano  culture.  Etched  on the sides of the monument are  words and phrases  that remind  visitors  of the  importance  of  acequias to the  region's cultural heritage.  The monument is even flanked  by  the main  irrigation  ditch that historically  delivered  water  to rural  croplands  in the same  valley  that holds  present-day Espafiola. Not  only  does the monument  provide  a link between  the rural  past  and the urban  present, it  provides  a  focal  point  for  a  bucolic  scene  on the  grounds  of an active,  urban  college  campus.

In  Santa  Fe  two  public  works  of art  skillfully capture  the  sentiment  urban  dwellers  have  for  acequias. Roughly  six  blocks  southeast  of the New  Mexico  State  Capitol is the  city's  old  acequia madre  (main,  or  mother,  ditch).  An abundance  of state  historical  markers explain  that  the ditch  was  constructed  at  the time of the first  Spanish settlement.  Today  both the elite,  upper-income  neighborhood  and the  narrow, adjoining  street  take  their  name  from  the  ditch,  although  it has  been decades  since it carried water  to  croplands. The  meaning  of the ditch  to the  local residents has  not faded.  Gracing the  west-facing wall  of  Acequia  Madre  Elementary School  is a  captivating  mural  completed  in  1989  by  a famous  local  artist,  Frederico Vigil,  with funding  from  the  City  of Santa  Fe  Arts  Commission  (Figure  7).  Revealed is a  joyful  scene that celebrates  everyday rural  life  along  an  acequia  with water  filled with fish and baskets  full of  crops  waiting  to be harvested. According  to an  adjacent  plaque  the mural is "dedicated  to the  acequia  madre  mayordomos [ditch bosses]. May  the

mother ditch continue to flow and  give  life to all future  generations." For  people who live  in the area  and  send  their  children  to the  school,  the mural  and  the  acequia madre  are  a connection to the  region's rural  cultural  roots.

In the  governmental  heart  of New Mexico  lies  yet  another  example  of the link between rural  and  urban  places  in  Hispano  cities.  One of the newest  displays in the State  Capitol  Annex  is a  sculpture  entitled  "Acequia" (Figure  8).  One of  twenty-five invited entries,  Tim Hooton's  sculpture  was selected  by  the  Capital  Arts Foundation because  it most  skillfully  captured  the essence  of New Mexico culture  (Larese 2000). The  5-by-7-foot  half-sculpture, half-fountain  is a  stylized  depiction  of a  man opening  an  acequia  headgate, thus  allowing water  to flow  over  mud-cracked, parched earth.  The  project  was commissioned  by  the Arts in Public Places  Program  of the New Mexico  Legislature as  part  of an effort  to  capture  the  contemporary  cultural character  of the state.  Hooton is  quoted  as  saying,  "I  went  with the  acequia  concept because  it is so  symbolic  of the  complex  and  varied  culture  in New Mexico"  (Larese 2000, 19). People  who view the  sculpture  are  instantly  reminded  of the  importance of water  in the  development  of the state  and of the interconnections  between  rural and urban  places  (Larese  2000).

## CONCLUSION

Cultural  geographers  have  paid  insufficient  attention to links between rural and urban  places  for too  long.  The bifurcated  nature  of research  within the subfield"traditional" rural versus "new"  urban-has  left a  gap  in our  comprehension  of urban structure  (Peach  2002).  Only through synthesis  will we  improve  our  appreciation of the cultural  environment  in which an  ever-increasing proportion  of the world's  population  is  living.

I have  argued  here that the  Hispano  urban  experience  is a window  through which ties between rural and urban  places  can be examined.  Hispano  culture is ideally  suited  for  analysis because  of the  extraordinarily deep  attachments  Hispanos have for the  village  of their  family's  roots.  Empirical  evidence shows that murals painted  on  neighborhood  walls  depicting  the  rural village  ideal,  preference for  burial in one's hometown  cemetery,  rural-based,  place-specific  music that fills the airwaves,  and  public  art that celebrates  the shared  vision of the  importance  of rural acequias  all  speak  of the  strong  ties  Hispanos  have  for the small  villages  of the  upper  Rio Grande.  Each  aspect  highlighted  here  boldly  reminds  urban-dwelling  Hispanos  of their  cultural  roots,  reinforcing cultural  identity  and  giving  them  feelings of  comfort,  security,  and  belonging.  These are  physical  and cultural  features  that are  documented,  but each also connotes a whole  range  of broader  psychological and  spiritual  life,  much as  landscape  always  has.

Explanation  of  how  the  rural village  ideal  is  incorporated into  cities  can  improve our understanding  of complex  urban experiences. With a focus on the Hispano culture, this article  suggests  how  geographers  can analyze  other culture  groups,  the attachment  that urban residents have for rural places,  and our  appreciation  of the cultural institutions  that create complex  urban life.

## NOTES

1.  A  major  exception  to this  predominantly  rural-to-urban  migration  trend  was the  "migration turnaround"  of the  1970s.
2.  As a  number  of scholars  have  convincingly  documented,  because  of their  early  isolation  (from colonial settlement to about the  186os)  Hispanic  residents  of northern New Mexico and southern Colorado  consider  themselves  distinct  from all other  Hispanic  Americans  (Burma  1970;  Campa  1979; Jones  1979;  Carlson  199o; Nostrand  1992).  Hispanos  claim,  vehemently  at  times,  to be direct  descendants of the  original  Spanish  settlers  and have  developed  unique  cultural  traditions.  Therefore,  most resident  Hispanics  refer  to themselves  interchangeably as either  "Spanish Americans"  or  "Hispanos." I have  chosen to use the latter  convention  in this article.
3.  All four of the cities I examined  have a sizable  Hispano population. Hispanos  constitute  the largest  percentage  of the resident  population  in the southwestern  quadrant  of the Duke  City  metropolitan area,  an area  known  vernacularly as the "Atrisco suburb." Due to  widespread  Anglo  intrusion and  subsequent Hispano displacement  throughout  most of Santa  Fe, my  research  focused on the southern  edge  of the  capital  city,  where a sizable  Hispano population  remains.  I also examined  the landscape  in the central-and therefore  oldest-section  of Santa  Fe,  near  the  plaza  and  capitol  building.  In  Espafiola,  Hispanos  are  evenly  distributed  and dominant  throughout  most of the  city,  so  my fieldwork  was  not restricted  to  any  particular part  of it.  The  Hispano  population  of  Pueblo,  Colorado, is concentrated  in four  major  sections.  My  focus there  was on the areas  known  locally  as  "Hyde  Park" and the "Bessemer  District," on the northwestern  and southwestern  sides of the  city,  respectively.

## REFERENCES

- Arreola,  D. D.  1984.  Mexican  American  Exterior  Murals.  Geographical Review  74 (4): 409-424.

.-.

1994.  The Mexican  American  Cultural  Capital.  In  Re-reading

Cultural  Geography, edited  by

- K.  E.  Foote,  P.  J.  Hugill,  K.  Mathewson,  and  J.  M.  Smith,  34-46.  Austin:  University  of Texas  Press.
2. .  2001. La  Tierra  Tejana: A South  Texas  Homeland.  In  Homelands: A  Geography of  Culture  and Place across  America,  edited  by  R. L. Nostrand and L. E. Estaville  Jr.,  101-124.  Baltimore,  Md.: Johns  Hopkins  University  Press.
3. Blake,  K.  S.,  and  D.  D.  Arreola.  1996.  Residential Subdivision  Identity  in  Metropolitan  Phoenix.  Landscape Journal 15 (1): 23-35.
4. Bondi, L.  1998. Gender,  Class,  and Urban  Space:  Public  and Private  Space  in  Contemporary  Urban Landscapes.  Urban  Geography 19 (2): 160-185.
5. Burma, J.  H.  1954. Spanish-Speaking Groups  in the United  States.  Durham, N.C.: Duke  University Press.
6. ,  comp.  1970.  Mexican-Americans in the  United  States: A Reader. Cambridge, Mass.:  Schenkman Publishing  Co.
7. Campa,  A. L.  1979. Hispanic  Culture  in the  Southwest. Norman:  University  of Oklahoma  Press.
8. Carlson,  A. W.  1990o.  The  Spanish-American Homeland:  Four Centuries  in New Mexico's Rio  Arriba. Baltimore,  Md.:  Johns  Hopkins  University  Press.
9. Carney,  G.  O.  1990.  The  Geography of Music:  Inventory  and  Prospect.  Journal  of  Cultural  Geography 10  (2): 35-48.
10. . 1998.  Music  Geography. Journal of  Cultural  Geography  18  (1): 1-10.
11. Chaivez-Bent, P.,  and  G.  Sinchez. 2000.  Corridos: Stories  through  Music.  La  Herencia  del  Norte  26  (3): 46-47.
12. Conzen,  M.  P. 2001. American  Homelands:  A  Dissenting  View.  In  Homelands: A  Geography of  Culture and  Place  across America,  edited  by  R.  L.  Nostrand  and L.  E.  Estaville  Jr.,  238-271.  Baltimore,  Md.: Johns  Hopkins  University  Press.
13. Cosgrove,  D.  E.  1993.  On "The  Reinvention  of Cultural  Geography" by  Price  and  Lewis.  Annals  of  the Association  of  American  Geographers 83 (3): 515-517.
14. .  1994. Worlds  of  Meaning:  Cultural  Geography  and the  Imagination.  In  Re-reading  Cultural Geography, edited  by K.  E. Foote,  P.  J.  Hugill,  K.  Mathewson,  and J.  M.  Smith, 387-395.  Austin: University  of Texas  Press.
15. Cosgrove,  D.  E.,  and S.  Daniels,  eds.  1988. The  Iconography of  Landscape: Essays  on the  Symbolic Representation, Design,  and Use  of  Past  Landscapes. Cambridge,  England,  and New York:  Cambridge University  Press.

- Curtis,  J.  R.,  and  R.  F.  Rose.  1983.  "The  Miami  Sound": A  Contemporary  Latin  Form  of  Place-Specific Music.  Journal  of  Cultural  Geography 4 (1):  11o-118.
- De Wit,  C.  W.  1997.  Sense  of Place  on the American  High  Plains.  Ph.D.  diss.,  University  of Kansas.
- Deutsch,  S.  1987.  No  Separate Refuge: Culture,  Class,  and Gender  on an  Anglo-Hispanic Frontier  in the American  Southwest, 1880-1940. New York:  Oxford  University  Press.
- Domosh,  M.  1992.  Urban  Imagery.  Urban  Geography 13 (5): 475-480.
- Duncan,  J.  S.  199o.  The  City  as  Text: The  Politics  of  Landscape Interpretation in the  Kandyan  Kingdom. Cambridge,  England,  and New York: Cambridge  University  Press.
- .  1994.  After  the Civil  War: Reconstructing Cultural  Geography as  Heterotopia.  In  Re-reading Cultural  Geography, edited  by  K.  E.  Foote,  P.  J.  Hugill,  K.  Mathewson,  and  J.  M. Smith,  401-408. Austin:  University  of Texas  Press.
- Duncan,  J.  S.,  and  D.  Ley,  eds.  1993. Place/Culture/Representation. London  and New York: Routledge. Duran,  A.  A.  1999.  Interview  with the author.  Espafiola, N.Mex.,  2  June.
- Fauntleroy, G.  1997.  La  Querencia: The Place  of  Your  Heart's  Desire.  New  Mexico  Magazine,  September, 22-30.
- Fincher,  R.,  and  J.  M.  Jacobs, eds.  1998.  Cities  of  Difference. New York:  Guilford  Press.
- Foote,  K.  E.,  P.  J.  Hugill,  K.  Mathewson,  and  J.  M.  Smith,  eds.  1994. Re-reading Cultural  Geography. Austin:  University  of Texas  Press.
- Foote,  K.  E.,  A.  T6th,  and  A.  Arvay.  2000. Hungary  after  1989:  Inscribing  a New Past  on Place.  Geographical  Review  go  (3): 301-334.
- Ford,  L.  R.,  and  E.  Griffin.  1981.  Chicano  Park: Personalizing  an Institutional  Landscape.  Landscape 25 (2): 42-48.
- Garcia, N. 1999.  Fiestas of the  Rio Puerco  Valley.  La Herencia  del Norte  25 (1): 9-11.
- Godfrey,  B.  J.  2002. Tragedy  and Transformation in New York  City. Geographical Review  92 (1): 127-139.
- Groth,  P.,  and T.  W.  Bressi,  eds.  1997. Understanding Ordinary  Landscapes. New Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University  Press.
- Hayden,  D.  1981.  The  Grand  Domestic  Revolution: A  History  of  Feminist Designs  for  American  Homes, Neighborhoods, and Cities.  Cambridge, Mass.:  MIT  Press.
- Harvey,  D.  1989.  The Condition  of Postmodernity: An  Enquiry  into the  Origins  of  Cultural  Change. Oxford,  England,  and  Cambridge, Mass.:  Blackwell.
- -.  1997.  Urban  Landscape  History:  The Sense of Place and the Politics of  Space.  In Understanding  Ordinary Landscapes, edited  by  P.  Groth  and  T.  W.  Bressi,  111-133. New Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University  Press.
- Hiebert,  D.  1999.  Local  Geographies  of Labor  Market  Segmentation:  Montreal,  Toronto,  and Vancouver,  1991. Economic  Geography 75 (4):  339-369.
- Herrera-Sobek, M.  1993.  Northward Bound:  The  Mexican  Immigrant  Experience in Ballad  and  Song. Bloomington:  Indiana  University  Press.
- Holdsworth,  D.  1993. Revaluing  the House. In  Place/Culture/Representation, edited  by J.  S. Duncan and D.  Ley, 95-109.  London  and New  York:  Routledge.
- Jackson, P.  1989. Maps  ofMeaning: An Introduction to  Cultural Geography. London  and  Boston:  Unwin Hyman.
- Jackson,  J.  B.  1984. Discovering the  Vernacular Landscape. New Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University  Press. .  1994.  A Sense  of  Place,  a Sense  of  Time.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University  Press.
- Jakle, J.  A.  1999.  America's Small  Town  /  Big  City  Dialectic.  Journal  of  Cultural  Geography 18  (2):  1-27. Jett, S.  C.  2001. The  Navajo Homeland.  In  Homelands: A  Geography of  Culture and  Place  across America, edited  by  R.  L.  Nostrand  and  L.  E.  Estaville Jr.,  168-183. Baltimore,  Md.:  Johns  Hopkins  University Press.
- Jones,  O.  L.,  Jr. 1979.  Los  Paisanos: Spanish  Settlers  on the  Northern  Frontier of  New  Spain.  Norman: University  of Oklahoma  Press.
- Jordan,  T.  G.,  J.  T.  Kilpinen,  and  C.  F.  Gritzner.  1997. The  Mountain  West: Interpreting the  Folk  Landscape.  Baltimore,  Md.:  Johns  Hopkins University  Press.
- Jordan-Bychkov,  T. G.  2001.  The Anglo-Texan  Homeland.  In Homelands: A  Geography of Culture and Place  across America,  edited  by  R. L. Nostrand and  L.  E.  Estaville  Jr., 125-138. Baltimore,  Md.: Johns  Hopkins  University  Press.
- Kenny,  J. T.  1995.  Making  Milwaukee  Famous:  Cultural  Capital,  Urban  Image,  and  the  Politics  of Place.  Urban Geography  16 (5): 440-458.

- Kloosterman,  R., J.  Van der Leun,  and J.  Rath.  1999.  Mixed Embeddedness:  (In)formal  Economic Activities  and  Immigrant  Businesses  in the Netherlands.  International Journal  of  Urban  and  Regional  Research  23 (2): 252-266.
- Kong,  L.  1995.  Popular  Music  in  Geographical  Analysis. Progress  in Human  Geography  19 (2): 183-198. Larese,  S.  2000.  New  Capitol  Sculpture  Goes with the Flow.  New Mexico  Magazine,  October,  19.
- Lewis,  P.  E  1979.  Axioms for  Reading  the  Landscape:  Some Guides to the American Scene. In The Interpretation of Ordinary  Landscapes: Geographical Essays,  edited  by  D. W.  Meinig, 11-32.  New York:  Oxford  University  Press.
- Ley,  D.  1996.  Urban  Geography  and Cultural  Studies. Urban  Geography 17  (6): 475-477.
- Li,  W.  1998.  Los  Angeles's Chinese  Ethnoburb:  From  Ethnic  Service  Center  to Global  Economy  Outpost.  Urban  Geography 19 (6): 502-517.
- Little,  J. 1999. Otherness,  Representation and the Cultural  Construction  of  Rurality. Progress in Human  Geography 23 (3): 437-442.
- Lopez,  A.  1999.  New Mexico:  Crossroads  for Latino  Music.  New Mexico  Magazine,  July,  43-47.
- Marsh,  B.  1987. Continuity  and Decline in the Anthracite  Towns  of  Pennsylvania. Annals  of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers  77 (3): 337-352.
- Martin,  C.  2000.  Ghosts of the Gallinas:  Prosperity  Goes Downriver  in Lush  Farming  Valley.  New Mexico  Magazine,  May,  26-35.
- Meinig,  D.  W.,  ed.  1979a.  The  Interpretation of Ordinary  Landscapes: Geographical Essays.  New York: Oxford  University  Press.
- Meinig,  D. W.  1979b. Symbolic Landscapes: Some Idealizations  of American  Communities. In The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes: Geographical Essays, edited  by  D.  W.  Meinig,  164-192.  New York:  Oxford  University  Press.
- Mills,  C.  1993. Myths  and  Meanings  of Gentrification.  In  Place/Culture/Representation, edited  by  J.  S. Duncan  and D.  Ley, 149-170.  London  and  New  York:  Routledge.
- Mitchell,  D.  1993.  Public  Housing  in  Single-Industry  Towns:  Changing  Landscapes  of Paternalism. In  Place/Culture/Representation, edited  by J.  S. Duncan and D.  Ley,  110-127.  London and New York:  Routledge.
- --.  1994. Landscape  and  Surplus Value:  The  Making  of the  Ordinary  in Brentwood,  California. Environment and  Planning  D:  Society  and  Space 12 (1): 7-30.
- Mitchell,  K.  1996. Visions of Vancouver: Ideology,  Democracy,  and the Future  of Urban  Development.  Urban  Geography 17 (6): 478-501.

..

1999.  What's Culture  Got to Do  with  It? Urban  Geography  20  (7): 667-677.
2. Muir,  R.  1999. Approaches to  Landscape. Lanham,  Md.:  Barnes  &amp;  Noble.
3. Myers,  G.  A.,  P.  McGreevy, G.  O.  Carney, and  J.  Kenny. Forthcoming.  Cultural  Geography. In  Geography  in America  at the  Dawn  of  the  21st  Century, edited  by  G. L.  Gaile  and C.  J.  Willmott.  Oxford: Oxford  University  Press.
4. Nash, P.  H., and G.  O. Carney. 1996.  The Seven  Themes of Music  Geography.  Canadian  Geographer 40  (1): 69-74.
5. Noble,  A.  G.,  ed.  1992.  To  Build  in a New  Land:  Ethnic  Landscapes in North  America.  Baltimore,  Md.: Johns  Hopkins University  Press.
6. Norton, W.  1989. Explorations in the  Understanding of Landscape: A Cultural  Geography. New York: Greenwood  Press.
7. Nostrand,  R. L.  1992.  The  Hispano  Homeland.  Norman:  University  of Oklahoma  Press.
8. Nostrand,  R.  L.,  and  L.  E.  Estaville Jr. 1993.  Introduction:  The  Homeland  Concept.  Journal  of  Cultural Geography 13 (2): 1-4.
9. ,  eds.  2001.  Homelands: A  Geography of  Culture and  Place  across America.  Baltimore, Md.:  Johns Hopkins University  Press.
10. Olwig,  K.  R.  1996. Recovering the  Substantive Nature  of  Landscape. Annals  ofthe  Association ofAmerican  Geographers 86  (4): 630-653.
11. Parsons,  J.  J. 1994. Cultural  Geography  at Work.  In Re-reading  Cultural  Geography, edited  by K. E. Foote,  P  J.  Hugill,  K.  Mathewson,  and J.  M. Smith,  281-288.  Austin:  University  of Texas  Press.
12. Peach,  C.  2002. Social  Geography:  New Religions  and Ethnoburbs-Contrasts with Cultural  Geography. Progress  in Human  Geography  26 (2): 252-260.
13. Rigg,  J.  1998. Rural-Urban  Interactions, Agriculture  and  Wealth: A Southeast  Asian  Perspective. Progress in Human  Geography  22 (4): 497-522.
14. Romero,  L.  1999. Interview  with the author.  Pueblo,  Colo.,  5 June.

- Rowles,  G.  D.,  and  M. L.  Comeaux.  1987.  A Final  Journey: Post-Death  Removal  of Human Remains. Tijdschrift voor  Economische en Sociale  Geografie 78 (2):  114-124.
- Ruddick,  S.  1996. Constructing  Difference  in Public  Spaces: Race,  Class,  and Gender  as  Interlocking Systems.  Urban  Geography 17  (2):  132-151.
- Schnell,  S. M.  2001. The Kiowa  Homeland  in Oklahoma.  In Homelands: A  Geography of  Culture  and Place across  America,  edited  by  R. L. Nostrand and L. E. Estaville  Jr.,  139-154.  Baltimore,  Md.: Johns  Hopkins University  Press.
- Smith,  J.  S.  1997. Landscape as  Diagnostic  of Cultural  Change  on the  Hispano  Homeland  Periphery. Ph.D.  diss.,  Arizona  State  University.
- ? 1999. Anglo  Intrusion  on the Old  Sangre  de Cristo  Land  Grant.  Professional  Geographer 51 (2):  170-183.
- Smith,  J.  S.,  M. R.  Engel,  D. A. Hurt,  J.  E.  Roth,  and  J.  M. Stevens.  2ool.  La Cultura  de la  Acequia Madre:  Cleaning  a  Community  Irrigation  Ditch. North  American  Geographer 3 (1):  5-28.
- Sopher,  D.  E.  1979.  The  Landscape of Home:  Myth,  Experience, Social  Meaning.  In The  Interpretation of Ordinary  Landscapes: Geographical Essays, edited  by  D.  W.  Meinig,  129-149.  New York:  Oxford University  Press.
- Smith,  M. D.  1996.  The  Empire  Filters  Back: Consumption,  Production,  and  the Politics  of Starbucks Coffee. Urban  Geography 17  (6):  502-525.
- Spain,  D.  1992.  A Gentrification Research  Agenda  for the  199os.  Journal  of  Urban  Affairs  14 (2): 125-134.
- Stoel,  T.  B.,  Jr. 1999.  Reining  in Urban  Sprawl.  Environment 41 (4): 6-11,  29,  31-33.
- Theobald,  D. M.  20o01. Land-Use  Dynamics beyond  the American Urban  Fringe.  Geographical Review  91 (3): 544-564.
- Tuan,  Y-E  1976.  Geopiety:  A Theme in Man's  Attachment  to Nature  and to Place.  In  Geographies of the  Mind:  Essays in Historical  Geosophy in Honor  of  John  Kirtland Wright,  edited  by  D. Lowenthal and M. J.  Bowden,  11-39.  New York: Oxford  University  Press.
- -. 1977. Space  and Place:  The  Perspective of  Experience. Minneapolis:  University  of Minnesota Press.
- Wagner,  P.  L.,  and  M.  W.  Mikesell,  eds.  1962. Readings in Cultural  Geography. Chicago:  University  of Chicago  Press.
- Warren, S.  1996. Popular  Cultural Practices in the  Postmodern  City.  Urban  Geography  17 (6): 545-567.
- Watson,  S.  1986.  Women and  Housing  or Feminist  Housing  Analysis.  Housing  Studies 1 (1):  1-1o.
- Welsh,  G.  G.,  Jr. 1999.  Interview  with the author.  Albuquerque,  N.Mex., 3 June.
- Wheeler,  J.  O.  1998.  Urban  Cultural  Geography:  Country  Cousin Comes to the  City.  Urban  Geography  19  (7): 585-590.
- Woods, L. A., and C. F. Gritzner.  1990o.  A Million Miles to the  City: Country  Music's  Sacred  and Profane  Images  of Place.  In Place  Images in Media:  Portrayal, Experience, and  Meaning,  edited  by L.  Zonn, 231-254.  Savage, Md.:  Rowman  &amp;  Littlefield.
- Wood,  J. 1997.  Vietnamese  American  Place  Making  in Northern  Virginia.  Geographical Review  87  (1): 58-72.
- Wright,  J.  K.  1947.  Terrae Incognitae: The Place  of the  Imagination  in  Geography. Annals  of  the  Association  of  American  Geographers 37 (1):  1-15.
- Wyckoff,  W.,  and L.  M. Dilsaver.  1995. Defining  the Mountainous  West.  In The  Mountainous  West: Explorations in Historical  Geography, edited  by  W.  Wyckoff and L.  M.  Dilsaver, 1-62.  Lincoln:  University  of Nebraska  Press.
- Zelinsky, W.  1992.  The  Cultural Geography of  the  United  States. Rev.  ed.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.: Prentice Hall.
- Zukin,  S.  1995.  The  Cultures of  Cities.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Blackwell.