<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Revisiting the Rural Revolution in East Carolina

Author(s): Johnathan Bascom

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 90, No. 3 (Jul., 2000), pp. 432-445

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250862

Accessed: 31-01-2016 20:50 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## REVISITING THE  RURAL  REVOLUTION IN  EAST  CAROLINA* JOHNATHAN  BASCOM

The  new factories that  are  sprinkled through the  area  reveal  that  the  release of the  farm  labor force  by  the mechanization of  the  leading  crop,  and the  concomitant  growth  of industry  that has been  attracted by  that released  labor force,  have  enabled  eastern  North  Carolina  to make  the transition from  an agricultural to  a mixed  economy...  in less  than  a  single  human  generation.

-John Fraser Hart and Ennis L.  Chestang,  1978

Whereas much  was  made,  in the  early  198os, of  the  supposed urban-rural shift in  manufacturing industries; it is now  far  less  clear  how  rural  regions are  to fare  in the  post-Fordist international economy.

-Terry Marsden,  Philip  Lowe, and Sarah Whatmore,  199o

In  1978,  as  changes swept  eastern North  Carolina,  nothing  less than a "rural  revolution" was heralded. Two  geographers,  John Fraser Hart and  Ennis L.  Chestang, argued  that mechanization  of flue-cured  tobacco  production  had  "emancipated"  a large  labor force from  agriculture  and that this  changeover  was in turn  attracting new factories  (1978, 435).  A  signature  of  the transition  to  advanced  capitalism  has since been said to include the decentralization of  manufacturing operations  in North America and  Europe (Knox  and  Agnew 1998).  What became of the rural revolution in North  Carolina? Did the  reconfiguration  into  an  industry-based  economy  continue  after the  1970s?  And is  globalized  manufacturing  serving  to reduce the competitive  advantage  of eastern North  Carolina and other rural  regions  in the United States?

## EAST  CAROLINA

Interstate  95  traces a  boundary  of  no  mean  significance  across North  Carolina. It marks the  divide-physical, historical, cultural, and economic-between the Coastal Plain  and  the  Piedmont  and  Mountain regions  of  the  state  (Bascom,  Carey,  and Zonn  1996, 203). Thirty-eight  of  the  forty-one  counties  in the  Coastal Plain were designated  as "rural"  by  the  1990 census,  constituting  the  largest  rural bloc  in  any single  state  along  the eastern seaboard  (U.S.  Bureau of the Census  1992) (Figure 1). The  region  has nonetheless  received more  than  its share of  shocks,  including  an unprecedented  blow  in  September  1999  when  Hurricane  Floyd  inflicted  an  estimated  regional  damage  of  $6 billion  (Associated  Press  2000)  (Figure 2).

*  I  wish to  acknowledge the  insights  of John  Chaffee, director  of the Pitt  County  Development  Commission,  and Paul  Chused,  vice-president  of  Hampton Industries,  as well as data  assistance by Mary  Fischer,  research  analyst with the North Carolina  Employment Security  Commission.  A  preliminary  study  was  completed  by graduate students  at East  Carolina University: Tom  King,  Richard  Gordon,  Marco  Cedillo,  Robert  Scull,  Mark  Lampe,  and Richard  Beachley.

ffi DR.  BASCOM is a  professor  of  geography  at Calvin  College,  Grand  Rapids, Michigan  49546.

"Down East"  has  long  been the "backwater" region  of the  state,  its  agrarian roots slow to die.  "King Cotton"  reigned  here at the turn of the  century. After  the boll-weevil  plague  came  tobacco.  Vertically integrated  chicken  and  hog operations were added to the  landscape  in the 1970s  and 198os (Hart  and  Chestang 1996a,  1996b; Hart  and  Mayda  1998).  And cotton is now  making  a dramatic  comeback  (Chestang 1996;  Lord  1996).  Agricultural changes notwithstanding,  1967  was the crossover  year, in which more eastern  North Carolinians  were  employed  in factories  than in the fields.

Clearly, the  diminishing  role  of  agriculture in rural  America  prompted  a movement of  industry  from the  city  into the  country.  By  1970,  improved  transport  and communication  technologies  had  severely eroded  distance  as  a  barrier  between  big business  and a  supply  of  cheap  labor,  creating  a  "permissive" environment  and the decentralization  of  production  (Knox  and  Agnew  1989, 92).  Small towns  in  rural areas  competed  for  factories,  offering  infrastructure and  sizable-perhaps  at times extensive-tax breaks. Especially in the  South,  manufacturing came  to be associated with branch  plants  in rural environments  (Lonsdale  and  Browning  1971,  257).

North Carolina's Coastal  Plain was  precisely  such an area.  A  large,  comparatively  cheap  labor  force  there  was  newly  furloughed  from  agricultural  employment yet  still  relatively  untouched  by  union  organizers.  The  1970S  witnessed dramatic industrial  growth-a 34  percent  increase  in  manufacturing jobs  for  the  thirty-eight rural  counties in the North Carolina  Coastal  Plain.  Nonmetropolitan  industrial growth  appeared  to have  the  brightest  of futures  (Seyler  1979;  Summer  and Selvik 1979).

But  the  optimism  shared by  rural  geographers, demographers, sociologists,  and economists  was short-lived.  The  surprising  demographic  turnaround  of the  1970S self-arrested, and  unemployment  rates  grew.  Structural change  and economic dislocation  became  themes  of the  198os  (Brown  and Deavers  1988, vii).  The  specter  of plant  closings  and  unemployment  was  more  pronounced  west  of the  Appalachians. Reasons  for the slowdown  were  multiple.  The overall  rate  of  profit  among  American  manufacturing firms  grew  flat,  having  dropped  nearly  in half from  an all-time high  of  25  percent  in the  mid-196os  (Chris  Edwards,  quoted  in Knox and  Agnew 1998,  99).  And labor  unions had  intensified  their  efforts  in the Southeast:  Hart  and Chestang  reported  determined  recruitment  efforts  under  way  in the Coastal  Plain by  the late  1970S  (1978,  457).

In  1981  the size of East  Carolina's manufacturing  labor force  dipped, only  to increase  again.  Slow  but  steady  growth  characterized the 198os  (Figure  3).  Although recession  came  in  1989, growth  renewed  after  a  quick  recovery. The  number  of workers  in the  thirty-eight  rural  counties  pushed  to its  highest  point  ever  in 1995-more than 160,000 (ESC  1970-1997).  Yet  the hard-earned  gains  of the 198os  and  early  1990s proved  fleeting.  Recently  released  data  from North Carolina's Employment  Security  Commission  indicate  a  6  percent loss of  jobs  in  just  two  years,  leaving  the counties  in  1997  with a level  of  manufacturing jobs  almost  identical  to that  of the 1980s. County-level  data  for  1998  and  1999  are  as  yet  unavailable, but the  governor's office

FIG.  1-The 19go  census  designated  thirty-eight  of the  forty-one  counties in the North Carolina Coastal  Plain  as  "rural." Only  three  counties-Cumberland,  New Hanover,  and Onslow-were  designated  as  "urban." The  present  study  focuses  on the same  seven  counties  as  John  Fraser Hart  and  Ennis L.  Chestang did in  1978. Two  plants,  Hampton  and  Fullarton, are  used  as  case  illustrations.  Source: U.S. Bureau  of the Census  1992.

<!-- image -->

estimated  the loss of 11o,ooo  manufacturing jobs  statewide  in the four  years  after 1995,  concentrated  in  rural areas  (Wagner 1999).  On  1  July 1999,  Governor  James B. Hunt  Jr.  proposed  a  plan  to  foster  new  economic growth  in  North  Carolina's rural areas.' Erskine Bowles, previous  head of the U.S. Small Business Administration and a former Clinton White House chief of staff,  leads the national Rural Prosperity  Task  Force.  The mere existence of such a task force reflects a realization  among policymakers  of  how  frail rural  manufacturing  jobs  have  become  in  the  face  of offshore  competition  (Bowles 1999, 51).

Assembly-line  goods  are  the  long-standing  economic  province  of rural  America. Textiles, apparel,  wood  products,  leather  goods,  shoes,  and  a few other  low-wage industries  accounted  for  40  percent  of total  nonmetropolitan manufacturing  employment  in  1983,  compared  with  only  19  percent  for the United  States as a whole (Brown  and Deavers  1988, 5).  The  mainstays  of  North  Carolina's industrial  sector were,  and  today  remain,  textiles,  clothing,  lumber,  furniture,  and  food  products (Brande 1978;  Johnson 1990, 79).  Furniture manufacturers  predominate  in western Carolina, but the other industries  have accounted  for as much  as 60  percent  of all workers in eastern Carolina. As  recently  as  199o,  textiles and  apparel  accounted  for

FIG.  2-Hurricane  Floyd  dumped  more  than  18  inches  of rain  on the  city  of Greenville,  North Carolina.  On 20  September 1999  the Tar  River  crested  at  nearly  30  feet.  The  city's industrial  park,  a  portion of which  is seen  here,  was  inundated  with water  that  was  nearly 16  feet  above  the  "normal" flood  stage. (Photograph  courtesy  of the GIS  Division of the Pitt  County  Office  for  Management  Information Systems)

<!-- image -->

almost  one-third  of the  region's manufacturing  jobs  (ESC 1990). But these  sectors have  been laid  particularly low  during  the 1990s.

Moving  production  lines  to the  predominantly southern  and  developing  counties  began during  the  198os.  The overseas  threat  drove  factory  wages  down, especially  in the  apparel  industry.  During  the 198os,  clothing  production  recorded  the lowest  increase  in  hourly  pay  and  annual  earnings  of all  of North Carolina's industrial workers-from $4.10  to  $6.09 per  hour and from  $7,845  to  $11,834 per year  (FRBR 1991).

By 1990,  American  blue-collar  workers  were  competing  more and more with the 12,000  new workers  being  added to the  global economy  each hour  (Reich 1991). For the last decade,  North Carolina  has  experienced  a  precipitous  decline in the number of textile  and  apparel  workers.2 While the state's apparel  workers  struggle to  procure  wages  above  $6.00  an  hour,  management  is  tapping  production  sites  in countries  where  workers  earn  less than $6.00  per day.  The  history  of the eastern region's largest  single  employer-until recently-provides  an  excellent  case  in  point.

FIG.  3-Since  1970,  rural  manufacturing  employment  in the North Carolina  Coastal  Plain  has recovered  from  each downturn  within  two  years.  Sources:  ESC  1970-1997.

<!-- image -->

## HAMPTON  INDUSTRIES

Hampton  Industries sells a  variety  of  clothing  items,  including  sport,  knit and dress shirts,  men's and women's  sleepwear  and  loungewear,  shorts,  ladies' blouses,  and bath towels.  The  city  of  Kinston,  North  Carolina, has been  the  company's  base of operations  since  1937.  By  the  early  196os its  leading  plant,  the Kinston  Shirt Company,  accounted  for about 2  percent  of the United States'  output  of men's dress and sport  shirts  (Lonsdale  1966, 114). By  the  198os Hampton was  supplying  goods  to household  brand-name  companies  like Land's End, Wal-Mart,  and  JCPenney.  It also  purchased  the  rights  to its own line of  sportswear-Le Tigre,  a  big  seller  among Hispanic  Americans.

Hampton  became the  region's largest single employer  of  manufacturing  workers, hiring  more  than  3,000  people  at  production facilities  in  Lenoir, Pitt, Greene, Beaufort,  and Wilson Counties and at affiliated  manufacturing plants  in  Martinsville, Chatham,  and Chase  City, Virginia.  In  1989, however,  the first of  its  plants  closed. The doors were shut at other  plants  soon  thereafter,  while  its first overseas  production  facility opened  in El Salvador.  Company  officials contend  that  they  took these actions  in order to  compete  with  Sears and Kmart, chains that  began  to  purchase directly  from  foreign producers  (Chused 1994).  In  1994,  when  Hampton  opened  its second  overseas  facility,  the  average wage  in  El Salvadorian factories was  65  cents per  hour. Another reason for the move came from the arcana of the American  quota system. Hampton  was the first American  apparel plant  in El Salvador,  which  gave

the  company a  clear  competitive  advantage: Once  clothing  quotas  from  a  given  country  were  filled,  no more  clothing  imports  could enter  the United States  from that country (Chused  1994).

By  early  1994,  Hampton's total  workforce  in the United States  had dwindled  to fewer  than  1,800. The  remaining floor  workers  at  the  original  Kinston  plant  earned $5.60  to $6.60  per  hour.  Limited  incentives  in the form of minimal bonuses were offered  to workers  as  production  quotas  were  met.  For  a few  months,  the  company retained  a limited domestic  workforce  to  help  fulfill  contractual  obligations  when imports  were  held  up  in customs  or  to handle  shipments  of  foreign-produced clothing  that  required  repairs before  it could  be forwarded to the retailer. But  in  July  1994 Hampton  shut its  original  production  facility  in  Kinston,  eliminating  1,500  additional  jobs.  Hampton  no  longer  produces  any  clothing  in the United  States; instead, its  remaining  employees  coordinate  design,  shipping,  and  accounting  for  the  growing  overseas operations.  The  old  Hampton  plant  stands  silent  at  the intersection  of Kinston's main  highways, a  place  of honor and  convenience  now  guarded  by  a sunbleached  "For  Sale" sign (Figure  4).

## A  CLOSER  LOOK

Several  factors  have  kept  textile and  apparel  companies  from  relocating  more of their  production  overseas. First, the United  States  maintains  a  majority stake  in two principal  garment  lines,  men's  knit shirts  and trousers. According  to a former  U.S. Textile  Trade  Association  Web  site,  in  1992  only 30 percent  of knit blouses were made in the United States,  compared  with  73 percent  of men's  shirts.  The same trend  was  true  for  trousers  and  shorts  (59  percent),  compared  with women's  slacks and  shorts  (41  percent).  Why  such  a  pronounced  differential exists  between  the  production location of male wear  (strongly  domestic)  and that of women, girls,  and infants  (predominantly  foreign)  deserves  more  study.

Second,  the American  garment  industry  is  restructuring  to better accommodate  the  finishing  and  refurbishing of  incoming  imports.  Although  product  assembly largely  moved to  foreign  sites, other  phases  of the  production process  have remained  in the United  States. Examples  of this  are  the  cutting  of  pieces  before  they are  shipped  overseas  for  assembly and,  after goods  are  returned  to the United  States for  inspection,  alterations  or  repairs.  Becoming  "cut-and-fix" shops  forestalled outright  closures  for some  apparel  companies.

Third,  despite the  loss  of  protection under  the  North  American  Free  Trade Agreement (NAFTA), quota  systems  still  provide  a  margin  against  the  importation  of textiles  and  apparel from  low-wage  sites  in  developing  countries.  Even  so,  the  hedge  of protectionism  for  workers  in the United  States  has  been cut  lower  and  lower. By  the early  1990s,  the "rule  of thumb"  for American  companies  was to shift  production sites  to "offshore locations"  if  wages  represented more than  30 percent  of final  production cost  (Robert  Reich,  quoted  in Garmon  1992).  Is East  Carolina's manufacturing  labor  force  finding  a niche in the new  global  division of labor?  To address that  question  I narrow  my  focus to a  study  area  comprising  seven  counties.

Edgecombe,  Greene,  Lenoir,  Nash, Pitt,  Wayne,  and Wilson Counties are located  at  the center  of North Carolina's Coastal  Plain  (Figure  i).  These  seven  constituted  State  Economic  Area  8,  which  was  featured in Hart  and  Chestang's 1978  analysis (p.  455).  In  1967,  upward  growth  in the number  of  manufacturing jobs outstripped agricultural employment.  The  shift  in total  employment  was  profound.  In  the  space of  slightly  more  than  a decade  (1964-1975), manufacturing  jobs  grew  from  fewer than  25,000  to more than  50,000,  while the number of  agriculture  workers declined from  45,000  to 21,000 (Hart  and  Chestang 1978,  455).  The seven counties  weathered the recession  of the  early  198os  better  than did most  parts  of the  country.  The  year 1989  marked  the  highest  absolute  number  of  manufacturing jobs  in the seven  selected  counties.

The 1990S began  with a  business  downturn,  but modest  recovery followed  (Figure  3).  This  pattern mirrored  that  of rural  economies  throughout  the United  States, which showed  strong  economic  performance  and  outperformed  metropolitan  areas  by  several measures  during  the  early  199os  (ERS g999a, o1). By 1995  the number of industrial  employees  for the  seven-county  region  (57,710)  was  nearly  back to its 1989  peak.  "Deindustrialization" seemed a  premature  characterization, especially given  that  two  foreign  firms  were  opening  plants  in the area.

## FULLERTON  COMPUTER  INDUSTRIES

A Scottish  manufacturer was one of those two firms. Fullarton  Computer  Industries,  based southwest  of  Glasgow,  manufactures casings  for  personal  computers from  sheet  metal  and  plastic,  assembles  keyboards, and  cuts,  coats,  and  installs  computer  cabling  in metal  casings.  Its clients  include  Xerox,  Unisys,  Hewlett-Packard, Mitsubishi,  IBM, and  Compaq.

In the late  1980s,  company  officials began  to  explore  the  feasibility of establishing  a  plant  in  the  United  States. Management  director  Allan  McLuckie  summarized their  rationale:  "America has  the infrastructure and  many  new  products,  which  our factories  here  [in Scotland]  may  share  when  they  are  developed  over  there  [in  the United  States].  We  set  up  at a time when there  were  a lot of sheet  metal  companies around,  but  from  the  outset  we  were  planning for  expansion  into  high  volume  business.  With the  computer  industry  requiring thousands  of  components  a week,  we wanted to serve the  leading  multinationals  in this field"  (1994, i).

Ultimately, Fullarton settled  on  Winterville, in Pitt  County, North  Carolina.  The company  could  meet  just-in-time  requirements for  IBM plants  in  the  Research Triangle Park.  The  county  offered  Fullarton a  lucrative incentive  package, which  included  half of the  cost  of  the  hookup  to a  natural gas  line  and  the  expense of  flying  local  managers to Scotland  for  training.  Particularly significant, East  Carolina  offered  a lower  wage structure than  did  the  adjacent Piedmont, yet  it  had  a  relatively well-trained labor  force, considering the  light-  to low-skilled nature  of the  work  itself. Wage  rates  offered  were 20  percent higher than  the  area's average starting wage  of  $4.85 per  hour  (Chaffee 1994). Meanwhile, a  local  community  college  agreed to  provide  entry  training for  Fullarton's new  employees who were  to be cross  trained  (Chaffee 1994).

FIG.  4-The now-abandoned  Hampton  Plant still dominates the downtown area  of  Kinston,  in Lenoir  County,  North Carolina. (Photograph  courtesy  of  Hampton  Industries)

<!-- image -->

The  company  signed  production  agreements with several major  American  computer companies,  and NAFTA provided  Fullarton  with even  greater  opportunities because  the  computer  industry was  one of the  top  five  industrial  segments  expected to increase  exports  to Mexico  and Canada  (McLuckie  1994).  The  company's location is suited for  rapid  product  delivery, given  the close  proximity  to its  principal customer-IBM's  plant  in the Research  Triangle  Park.  By  late  1998  Fullarton Computer  Industries  had become one of the nine  largest  industrial  employers  in the seven-county area,  with 650  workers (Colsen 1999;  ESC  1999a) (Figure  5).

## DIRECT  INVESTMENT  AS A CAROLINA  RESPITE

Taken  as a  whole,  North Carolina  has benefited  from  foreign  direct  investment  as much  as,  if not more  than,  any  other  state  (Campbell and Stuart  1998,  40).  But  that investment  is  decidedly in favor  of  metropolitan  areas  in the  Charlotte-Raleigh corridor.  In  spite  of Fullarton's arrival, the  seven-county  region  is home to  only  five foreign-owned  plants.  In  July  1999  Governor  Hunt declared, "We  are  on a roll as a whole  state,  but  the  fact  is  we're not on a  roll  everywhere in North  Carolina" (Wagner 1999).  The  most  recent  employment data corroborate  his  analysis.  Between  1995 and 1997  the number of  manufacturing  employees  decreased  more in the sevencounty  subset  (8  percent)  than  in East  Carolina as  a  whole  (6  percent).  Fewer  manufacturing jobs  exist in the seven counties  now  than in  1980 (ESC 1980-1997).

FIG.  5-Inside  the Fullerton  plant, power presses  mold and  shape  sheet metal into  pieces,  which employees  then assemble  into  computer  chassis.  (Photograph  courtesy  of the Pitt  County Development Commission)

<!-- image -->

Job  losses  are linked  to  several  factors.  The  first  is  the  transformation of nonmetropolitan areas into  service-based  economies.  During  the  196os and  1970s, commuting  great  distances from  highway-side  homes to factories allowed  many  East Carolinians to maintain a rural residence  (Hart  and  Chestang 1978,457).  Work commutes extended even farther  during  the  1980s.  But in the 199os  the  journey-to-work profile  reversed:  Commuting  times became  markedly shorter, reflecting  the  expansion of service  jobs  in rural locations  (Bascom  and Gordon  1999).  This is in  keeping with  service  jobs  that now  employ  more  rural workers than  do  goods-producing industries  (ESC 1997).

The  global  financial  crisis  poses  another  threat. Economic recovery  is under way  in  Asia,  but  the  world  economic slowdown, a  strong dollar,  and  jittery financial  markets leave an unfavorable  environment for American  exports  (ERS i999a, 7).  Rural  areas  experience  such  impacts  first,  and  they  are often hit the hardest.  By  1996  a  $9,204 gap  had  opened, for  example,  between  metropolitan and nonmetropolitan earnings  per  nonfarm  job  nationwide,  the  largest  since  the late 1960s  (ERS 1999b,  6).

The decline in  manufacturing jobs  also reflects  deep  structural  changes.  The last three decades have witnessed  major  shifts in  plant-ownership  patterns.  In the  early 1970S  four-fifths of all  manufacturing  firms in the seven counties were  locally  owned operations  (Figure 6).  Ten  years  later their number had decreased 20  percent,  while

FIG. 6-The number  of  externally owned  plants-172-was exactly  the same in 1999  as in 1982,  but the number  of  locally  owned  plants  grew  substantially. The  392 locally  owned  plants  employ  6,673  of the  eastern region's rural factory  workers, compared with  1,710 workers  in  foreign-owned plants  (3.3  percent),  4,592  in  plants  associated  with  companies  in another  North Carolina  county (8.8  percent),  and 37,013 in  plants  owned  by companies  in another  state (75.0 percent).  Sources: DECD 1972, 1982, 1992; Colsen  1999.

<!-- image -->

firms  maintaining  headquarters  in another North Carolina  county,  in another state, or in another  country  had increased  132  percent.  This  dramatic  growth  reflects a nationwide  diffusion  of branch  plants  into rural  regions, particularly  in the Southeast. Since the  early  1980s,  however, the  pattern  has reverted to  mostly  local  operations in the seven counties. That the number of  locally  owned  plants  now far exceeds that of  the  early  198os  underscores  the  magnitude  of  the  restructuring  process  in rural areas.3

During  the g99os,  a double  squeeze-retailers' increasing  demands  for  lower prices, higher  quality,  and  quicker response  times,  atop  an  ever-increasing  supply of  the  foreign  workers-prompted further  restructuring  for  manufacturing  companies  in  eastern North  Carolina.  Outsourcing  to  small,  contract  sewing  shops  is frequent, notably  as a result of worker  buyouts,  which  can then  operate  independently  or under a  conglomerate  umbrella. In some  cases, the  restructuring process

has  stretched  even  farther, to  support  industrial  home  work-taking goods  home to be  completed  there.  The  relocation  of  manufacturing to inside  the homes  along  the byways  of the Coastal  Plain  is mirrored  in recent  plant-ownership trends.  Clothing and  apparel plants  account  for  50  of the  nearly  400  locally owned  plants  in  the  sevencounty  area  (Colsen  1999).  Outsourcing and  home  work  represent an  informalization of the  apparel industry  and  an  even  clearer demarcation  between  low-end  and  highend  manufacturing.

In the  study  area,  the count of  plants  with  headquarters outside the  county  in which  they operate  for  1997  was  exactly  the  same  as in  1982.  Many  of  the  replacement  plants  are  tapping  rural  labor  pools  that have  been  "emancipated" from the textile and  apparel  industries  for other  forms of routine  production.  A new  Japanese  company,  ASMO,  is one  example: It  "took  the  best  women in  apparel" and  gave them a  50  percent pay  increase and  much-improved  benefits  (Chaffee 1999).  Fullarton represents another  such  firm.

"High-end"  manufacturers  are  what the  region's  economic  developers  would prefer. Plants  at  the  high  end of the sic continuum are  more  likely  to hire  a multiskilled  workforce that  is  employed  according to a  pay-for-skill structure  rather  than a  time clock  to do  overlapping work  in  design,  production,  and  inspection  (Chaffee 1999).  Cross-trained  workforces  can be involved in all  phases  of  production,  including  design,  process  decision  making, final  inspection,  and  workstation  cleanup. "Greying" the historical  distinction  between  blue-collar  and white-collar  workers makes  for  companies  that  can  respond both  effectively and  rapidly to market  conditions.

Demand-responsive  industries  such as industrial  machinery  and  transportation  equipment  are  attractive to the  region because  they  raise  average and  real  wages. A  nearly  complete  absence  of labor unions is one  comparative  advantage  in East Carolina's  favor.  That union  membership  is limited to  roughly 1 percent  of the region's industrial  workers  means  added  flexibility for  securing  a multiskilled  labor force.4  But  it also means  lower  wages: In  1994  the  average wage  for  manufacturing jobs  in the  representative counties  of this  study  was  only  84  percent  of that  for  rural counties  in the United  States as a  whole-$24,982 as  against $29,519 (ESC  1995;  ERS 1997).

## SHIFTS  AND  SHAKES

The American  manufacturing  sector has  experienced  two decades  of  major  geographical  shifts.  The move into rural  areas,  especially  in the  Southeast,  prompted the  explosive  growth  of  manufacturing in East  Carolina. What Hart  and  Chestang anticipated  successfully was the  increasing  flexibility and  mobility  of  capital.  Amid the boom of the  1970s,  they argued  that  branch  plants  attracted by  an  inexpensive labor force  would "not  provide  a sound base for sustained  economic  growth  because  they might  move on to Mexico  or  Hong Kong  or Korea  when  wages  begin  to rise in eastern  North Carolina" (1978,  457).  In that  respect,  Hart and  Chestang's predictions  about  the  global  shift  to the  developing  South  were  borne  out.  And  yet,

measured in terms of  job losses, the  impact  from offshore  manufacturing  sites took much  longer  to reach East Carolina than  might  have been  expected, especially given the  growth  of  outsourcing  and home  work.

During  the  1970S  the  big  question  was  which  lucrative,  job-producing plants would come. In 198os,  however, the  question  became how  long they  would  stay.  For East Carolina, the  year 1995  may prove  to have been that benchmark.  Jobs are what matter  most  to  any region,  and  the  pace  of  job  losses  picked  up  during  the  late 199os.  For the first time  ever,  a downward  trend in the  number  of  manufacturing jobs  for the  region  lasted more  than  two  years.  And in  September  1999, manufacturers received another  unexpected  blow  at the hands of Hurricane  Floyd.  A direct result was the loss of an estimated  6,000  manufacturing  jobs.

Beyond  East Carolina's horizon lies  the  increasing  flexibility of  capital, so that  segmentation of  labor  supplies constitutes a fundamental motion in  the post-Fordist era  (Dicken  1998).  Within  North  Carolina,  though, the  comings and  goings  of  plants  suggest  very  different  regional  scenarios.  The  Piedmont is one  of  the  three  most  attractive  locales  for  business relocations in  the  nation, securing  hundreds  of  new  factories  in  1997  and  1998 (Venable  1997, 1998).  But rural-based  East Carolina  is not  so  fortunate.  The  state  of  North  Carolina  currently  enjoys  an  average unemployment rate of  2.2  percent,  well  below  the  national  rate of  4.1 percent  (ESC  i999b).  Yet  only  ten  counties in  the  Coastal  Plain have  unemployment rates at,  or even  near,  that  average.  On i  July  1999 Governor Hunt  went  as far as to  declare that the  state was "on the  verge  of  becoming two North Carolinas" (Wagner  1999).  Touted  as  the  last  major initiative of  the governor's  four terms  in  office,  the  Rural  Prosperity  Task Force is an  urgent  call for  a new  "rural revolution"  in  East Carolina.

## NOTES

1. The  governor cited  the  fact  that  rural  areas are  suffering from  plant  closings and  layoffs, severely depressed agricultural commodity prices, and  a  sharp decline  in tobacco income.  Statewide, agricultural income  dropped 13  percent between  1997 and  1998; in five  southeastern counties, the decline was  24  percent. Because of  shrinking consumption, falling quotas, and  other  factors, tobacco income declined  by 17  percent  in  1998  (Wagner  1999).
2. Textile and  apparel unions looked to  increasing automation and  education as  counterstrategies to  save jobs. In  1989, representatives from  the  International Ladies Garment Workers Union  and  Amalgamated Clothing and  Textile Workers Union  joined with  forty-two textile corporations to form  the Textile Clothing  Technology Corporation in  Raleigh. The  goal  of the  nonprofit organization is to develop, test,  and  manufacture state-of-the-art equipment for  the  textile  industry, using  the  latest robotics and  fiber optics to  produce labor-saving devices and,  thereby, to  out-compete foreign labor. The  state  government offered $3.4 million  in  matching funds  to  help  create new  jobs  in  North  Carolina  (TCTC 2000).
3.  Locally  owned  plants  employ  an  average of 28  factory  workers.  The  average size of the labor force  for  externally owned  plants  varies  according to  plant  ownership: Plants  owned  by companies  in another  county  of North Carolina  average  124  workers; plants  owned  by companies  in another  state, 315  employees;  and  foreign  owned  plants,  342  workers  (Colsen  1999).
4.  Verifying  union  membership  rates  is not  easy,  but Pitt  County  is a reasonable proxy  for the region:  Of more  than  io,ooo  manufacturing workers  in the  county,  less  than i  percent  are  unionized (Chaffee 1999).

## REFERENCES

- Associated  Press. 2000.  Record  Flood  Buyout  OK'd. Raleigh News &amp; Observer, 27  May,  34.
- Bascom, J.,  and R. Gordon.  1999. "Country  Living":  Rural  Non-Farm  Population  Growth in the Coastal Plain of North Carolina. In  Reshaping  the  Countryside:  Perceptions and Processes  of Rural  Change,  edited  by  N. Walford,  J.  Everitt,  and D.  Napton, 77-90. Wallingford,  England: CAB International.
- Bascom,  J.,  K.  Carey, and L.  Zonn.  1996. Riding  the Fifth  Wave: Building  a Global  Transpark in Rural North Carolina.  In  Snapshots of  the  Carolinas: Landscapes and Cultures, Including  Suggested Field Trips, edited  by  D.  G.  Bennett,  203-207.  Washington, D.C.:  Association  of American  Geographers.
- Bowles,  E.  1999.  Hand-in-Hand:  Helping  Rural  Areas  Prosper  Will Enrich  Our Urban  Areas,  Too. North  Carolina,  September, 51.
- Brown,  D.,  and  K.  Deavers.  1988.  Rural Change  and  the  Rural  Economic  PolicyAgenda for  the  198os. In Rural  Economic Development in  the  198os: Prospectsfor the  Future, edited  by  D.  Brown  and  K.  Deavers, i-xvii.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of  Agriculture, Economic  Research Service.
- Brande,  D.  1978.  Labor  Supply  and Demand in North Carolina for 1978:  Report for  the  Employment Security  Commission. Raleigh: North Carolina  Employment  Security  Commission.
- Campbell,  H.,  and  A. Stuart.  1998. Foreign  Direct  Investment  in North Carolina. North  Carolina  Geographer 6:  37-49.
- Chaffee,  J. 1994.  Interview  with the author.  Greenville, N.C.,  20 March.
1999.  Interview  with the author.  Greenville, N.C.,  2  September.
- Chestang,  E.  1996.  The Great  Cotton  Explosion.  In  Snapshots of  the  Carolinas: Landscapes and Cultures,  Including Suggested Field  Trips, edited  by  D.  G.  Bennett,  175-178. Washington, D.C.:  Association  of American  Geographers.
- Chused,  P.  1994.  Interview  with the author.  Kinston,  N.C.,  5  April.
- Colsen, F.,  ed.  1999. 1999  Harris  North Carolina  Manufacturers Directory. Twinsburg,  Ohio: Harris Infosource  International, in  cooperation  with the North Carolina  Department  of Commerce.
- DECD [North Carolina  Department  of  Economic and  Community Development]. 1972. 1972-73 Directory of  North  Carolina Manufacturing Firms.  Raleigh, N.C.:  Department  of Natural  and  Economic Resources.
1982.  1982-83 Directory of  North  Carolina  Manufacturing Firms.  Raleigh,  N.C.:  Department of Economic  and  Community  Development.
1992.  1992-93  Directory of  North  Carolina Manufacturing Firms.  Raleigh,  N.C.:  Department of Economic  and  Community  Development.
- Dicken,  P.  1998.  Global Shift:  Transforming the  World  Economy. 3d  ed.  New  York: Guilford  Press.
- ERS  [U.S.  Department of  Agriculture, Economic  Research Service]. 1997.  Rural Development  Briefing Room.  Formerly at  [www.econ.ag.gov].
- ggg999a. National  Economy.  Rural  Conditions and Trends 9 (3):  7-10.
- g999b. Overview.  Rural  Conditions and Trends 9 (3):  4-6.
- ESC  [North  Carolina  Employment  Security  Commission]. 1970-1997. Wages and Workers. Raleigh: North Carolina  Employment  Security  Commission.
- .  1995. Employment and  Wages  in North  Carolina,  1994.  Raleigh:  Employment  and  Security Commission of North Carolina.
- g999a. North  Carolina Employment  Security Commission.  Formerly at  [www.esc.state.nc.us/ Imi/largest/topten].  July.
- .  999b.  North  Carolina Employment  Security Commission.  Formerly at  [www.esc.state.nc.us/ news].  9  November.
- FRBR  [Federal Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond]. 1991.  An  Economic Profile of  North  Carolina and  Its  Counties.  Richmond,  Va.:  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of Richmond.
- Garmon,  L.,  dir.  1992.  Made  in the USA?  Winner and  Losers. Films  for the Humanities  and Sciences: 58  mins.  Videocassette.
- Hart,  J.  F.,  and E.  L.  Chestang. 1978.  Rural  Revolution  in East  Carolina.  Geographical Review  68  (4): 435-458.
- 1996a.  Turmoil in Tobaccoland.  Geographical  Review 86  (4): 550-572.
- .  996b.  Vertical Integration  and Confinement  Production  of Broilers, Turkeys, and  Hogs.  In Snapshots of  the  Carolinas: Landscapes and  Cultures, Including Suggested Field  Trips, edited  by  D.  G. Bennett,  183-187.  Washington,  D.C.: Association  of American  Geographers.

- Hart,  J.  F.,  and C.  Mayda. 1998.  The Industrialization of Livestock  Production  in the United States. Southeastern Geographer 38 (1):  58-78.
- Johnson,  M.  1990. A  Survey-Based Analysis  of Race  and  Manufacturing Branch  Plant Location  in the  Nonmetropolitan  South.  Southeastern Geographer 30 (2): 79-93.
- Knox,  P.,  and  J.  Agnew. 1989. The  Geography of  the  World-Economy. London:  Edward  Arnold.
1998.  The  Geography of  the  World  Economy: An Introduction to Economic  Geography. 3d  ed. London:  Edward  Arnold.
- Lonsdale,  R.  1966.  Two North  Carolina  Commuting Patterns. Economic  Geography 42 (2): 114-138.
- Lonsdale,  R.,  and C.  Browning. 1971.  Rural-Urban Locational  Preferences  of Southern  Manufacturing.  Annals  of  the Association  of  American  Geographers  61  (2): 255-268.
- Lord, J.  D. 1996.  The New  Geography  of Cotton  Production.  Southeastern  Geographer  36 (2): 93-112. Marsden,  T.,  P.  Lowe,  and  S.  Whatmore,  eds.  1990. Introduction.  In Rural  Restructuring: Global  Processes and Their  Responses, edited  by  T.  Marsden, P.  Lowe,  and  S.  Whatmore,  1-20.  London:  David
- Fulton Publishers.
- McLuckie,  A.  1994. Prospectus  on Fullarton  Industries.  Report  for the Pitt  County Development Commission,  Greenville,  N.C.
- Reich,  R.  1991.  The  Work of  Nations:  Capitalism in the  21st  Century. New York: Vintage  Books.
- Seyler, H.  1979. Contemporary  Research Emphases  in the United States.  In  Nonmetropolitan Industrial  Growth  and  Community  Change, edited  by  G.  E  Summers  and A.  Selvik,  43-57.  Lexington, Mass.:  Lexington  Books.
- Summer,  G.  F, and  A.  Selvik,  eds.  1979.  Nonmetropolitan Industrial  Growth and  Community  Change. Lexington,  Mass.:  Lexington  Books.
- TCTC  [Textile  Clothing  Technoloy  Corporation].  2000.  [http://www.tc2.com]. 22 December.
- U.S.  Bureau  of the Census.  1992. 1990 Census  of  the  Population and  Housing, North Carolina.  Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of Commerce.
- Venable,  T.  1997.  North Carolina  Races  Past  Ohio,  Texas  to Win  1996  Facility  Location  Gold Medal. Site  Selection 42 (1): 2-7.
- .  1998.  North Carolina: A Powerful  Work-Force Resource.  Site  Selection 43 (3):  557.
- Wagner, J. 1999.  Group  Aims  to  Rejuvenate Rural  Areas. Raleigh  News  &amp; Observer. [http://archiveslo .newsbank.com].  2  July.