<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Rural-Urban Correlates for Indian Urbanization

Author(s): Ashok K. Dutt, Charles B. Monroe and Ramesh Vakamudi

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 76, No. 2, Thematic Issue: Asian Urbanization (Apr., 1986), pp. 173-183

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/214623

Accessed: 28-01-2016 05:58 UTC

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/214623?seq=1&amp;cid=pdf-reference#references\_tab\_contents

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## RURAL-URBAN CORRELATES  FOR INDIAN URBANIZATION

## ASHOK  K. DUTT,  CHARLES  B. MONROE,  and  RAMESH  VAKAMUDI

ABSTRACT. This study examines twenty-three variables  for 388 Indian districts with data, segregated by sex and grouped in urban and rural categories. Variables  strongly correlating  with urban  districts include high female/male  ratio, population  density, female literacy, and household  workers.  A model shows a rural-urban  continuum.

ACCORDING  to the  1981 Indian census,  the  urban category accounted for 156 million  persons, or approximately 24 percent of the total population  of  India. At  the  international  scale,  the  figure  was  exceeded only  by China, the United States, and the Soviet Union.  The urban tally for India in  1901 was  25.6 million.  Between  that census  and  the  one  in  1981, the urban portion of the  population  increased at an average rate of 64 percent a decade. However,  between  1971 and 1981, the urban increase was 46 percent, or approximately twice  the  overall growth  rate of population  and two and one-half times the rate of rural population  growth.1

The growth  of large urban centers was  related to the Indian process of urbanization, a generalization  that was  demonstrated by  the  high  positive correlation  between city size and growth rate  of urban population.2  A marked decline  in  the  index  of urbanization appeared when  figures for the  largest cities were excluded from state totals.3  However,  during the period 1971-81 cities  with  more  than  one  million  population  registered  a  slightly  lower growth  rate (45%)  in  comparison  to cities  in  the  200,000-to-1,000,000  class, which  expanded  by  approximately  50 percent.  In  1981, 57 percent  of  the urban population  lived  in  cities with  100,000 or more residents (Class I) in contrast to the  26 percent in  1901 (Fig. 1). This group of cities experienced slow  growth until  1931, after which  its proportion far outpaced the general trend.

Numerous studies have examined rural-urban  differences in India.4  Most such studies  used  aggregate data at the  national, state, or city  level.5 They

I  Registrar General  and  Census  Commissioner  of  India,  Census  of  India  1981, Provisional  Population  Totals,  Rural-Urban Distribution,  Paper 2 (New  Delhi:  Government  of  India  Press,  1981),  18.

2 Debnath  Mookherjee,  Urbanization  Pattern in  India:  1951-1961,  Professional  Geographer  21 (1969): 308.

3Leo Jakobson and Ved  Prakash, Urbanization  and  Regional  Planning  in  India,  Urban  Affairs  Quarterly 2 (1967): 3.

4N. V. Sovani,  Urbanization  and  Urban  India  (London:  Asia  Publishing House,  1966), 32; Ashish Bose,  India's  Urbanization 1901-2000  (New  Delhi:  Tata McGraw-Hill,  1978), 3; D.  K. Bose, Urbanization,  Industrialization  and Planning  for Regional  Development, Economic  and Political Weekly  no. 4 (1969),  1169.

5DKingsley  Davis,  The Population  of India and Pakistan (Princeton,  N.J.: Princeton  University  Press, 1951); Qazi  Ahmad,  Indian  Cities:  Characteristics  and  Correlates  (Chicago:  University of  Chicago Press,  1965); Debnath  Mookerjee  and  Richard L. Morrill,  Urbanization  in  a Developing Economy: Indian  Perspectives  and  Patterns  (Beverly  Hills,  Cal.: Sage  Publications, 1973).

*  DR. DUTT  is  a professor  of  geography and  urban  studies  at the  University of  Akron, Akron,  Ohio  44325,  where  DR. MONROE is  an assistant  professor  of  geography,  and  MR. VAKAMUDI  is  a  facilities planner.

## URBAN  POPULATION, 1901-1981 (by class)

<!-- image -->

have  established significant relationships  between  occupations and the  degree  of  urbanization  at  the  national  level.  This  study  documents  occupational patterns, based on  the  distribution of rural and urban population  at the district level.  It is the initial attempt to analyze  the correlation between

urbanization and occupational and social variables with  1981 census data at the district level. The geographical scale permits critical  examination of these relationships. Moreover, the data are disaggregated by sex to give an assessment  of this  factor in  work-force characteristics. The study  used  a twofold classification of districts: a group  with  a high  percentage of urban population,  and  one  with  a  high  percentage  of  rural population.  This  procedure allows occupational or demographic characteristics  to display rural or urban polarization and  hence  easy  interpretation  and  understanding  of  rurality and urbanism.

TABLE  I-CORRELATION BETWEEN  URBANIZATION AND  OCCUPATIONAL/DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLE  BY DISTRICT  1981

| INDEPENDENT VARIABLEa                            | PEARSON S CORRELATION   |
|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------|
| Literates as %of pop.                            | 0.5186b                 |
| Male literates as %of male pop.                  | 0.4847b                 |
| Female literates as %of female pop.              | 0.5101b                 |
| Cultivators as %of working pop.                  | -0.5904b                |
| Male cultivators as %of male-working pop.        | -0.6373b                |
| Female cultivators as %of female-working pop.    | -0.3271b                |
| Agr. laborers as %of working pop.                | -0.1030c                |
| Male agr. laborers as %of male-working pop.      | -0.1521c                |
| Female agr. laborers as %of -female-working pop. | -0.0504d                |
| Household laborers as %of working pop.           | 0.1853b                 |
| Male h.l. as %of male-working pop.               | 0.1300c                 |
| Female h.l. as %of female-working pop.           | 0.1632c                 |
| Other workers as %of working pop.                | 0.6946b                 |
| Male other workers as %of male-working pop.      | 0.5992b                 |
| Female other workers as %of female-working pop.  | 0.6575b                 |
| Marginal laborers as %of working pop.            | -0.1973b                |
| Male m.l. as %of male-working pop.               | -0.0951c                |
| Female m.l. as %of female-working pop.           | -0.1379b                |
| Nonworkers as %of pop.                           | 0.2109b                 |
| Male nonworkers as %of male pop.                 | 0.1109C                 |
| Female nonworkers as %of female pop.             | 0.2487b                 |
| Density of pop./sq. km                           | 0.5147b                 |
| Sex ratio (females/ 1,000 males)                 | -0.2543b                |

Source:  Calculations  by  authors.

a  Dependent variable  is  urban population as a %  of  total  population.

b  Highly  significant  (p  &lt;  .001).

c  Significant (.001  ' p  &lt;  .05).

dNot significant (p  ' .05).

A distinction  between  rural and urban areas is not always  possible in a single  definition  that is applicable to all countries or even  to different areas in  a country.  Ideally, the  useful  definition  of  an  urban area is  in  terms of level  of  infrastructure, availability  of  civic  amenities,  and  proportions  of landuses as well  as conventional  factors like density  of population and proportion of  nonagricultural work  force. Broad criteria were  not  adopted for the  definition  of  urban areas in  the  1981 Indian  census.  It conventionally defined  urban areas as all places with  a municipality,  corporation, cantonment  board, or notified  town-area  committee; and  all other  places  with  a

FIG.  2-Rural and  urban districts  1981.

<!-- image -->

minimum  population of 5,000, with  at least 75 percent of the working male population  in  nonagricultural  activities,  and  with  a  minimal  population density  of 400 persons  a square kilometer.6 In addition, the  urban classification included other types of areas such as major development-project colonies, intensive  industrial zones,  and important tourist sites.

Data for this study come from the 1981 census. They were obtained from provisional  population  totals for rural and urban population  and  employ-

6 Registrar General,  footnote 1 above,  23.

ment, disaggregated by sex. We surveyed 388 districts in the country, except for  the  states  of  Jammu  and  Kashmir  and  Assam,  for  which  data  were lacking. We selected Pearson's correlation to identify  the  occupational and demographic correlates with  urbanization (Table I).

The 388 districts were grouped in three categories on the basis of degree of urban population. The average urbanization of India was 23.7 percent in 1981. Districts with  a proportion of less  than  0.5 standard deviation  below this  mean  (16 percent) were  rural, and districts with  greater than  0.5 standard deviation above the mean (32 percent) were urban. Districts with urban proportions  between  17 and  31  percent  were  intermediate  (Fig. 2).  Fiftyseven  districts were  urban, and  199 were  rural. Urban districts were  scattered throughout  the  country, although  there was  a distinct  concentration in  western  India. Fifty-three urban districts had one  or more cities in Class

TABLE II-T-VALUES FOR  OCCUPATIONAL/DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLES IN RANK  ORDER 1981

| VARIABLE                                                | DIRECTION   | T-VALUE   |
|---------------------------------------------------------|-------------|-----------|
| Male cultivators as %of male-working pop.               | rural       | 13.82a    |
| Other male workers as %of male-working pop.             | urban       | -11.51a   |
| Other female workers as %of female-working pop.         | urban       | -11 .00a  |
| Female literates as %of female pop.                     | urban       | - 10.18a  |
| Male literates as %of male pop.                         | urban       | -9.48a    |
| Female cultivators as %of female-working pop.           | rural       | 5.14a     |
| Female nonworkers as %of female pop.                    | urban       | -4.43a    |
| Density of population/square kilometer                  | urban       | - 4.39a   |
| Sex ratio (female/ 1,000 males)                         | urban       | 3.67a     |
| Female household laborers as %of female-working pop.    | urban       | -3.67a    |
| Male household laborers as %of male-working pop.        | urban       | -2.67b    |
| Male nonworkers as %of male pop.                        | rural       | 2.67b     |
| Female marginal laborers as %of female-working pop.     | rural       | 2.36b     |
| Male agricultural laborers as %of male-working pop.     | rural       | 2.32b     |
| Male marginal laborers as %of male-working pop.         | rural       | 1.80c     |
| Female agricultural laborers as %of female-working pop. | rural       | 0.82c     |

Source:  Computed  by  authors.

a  Highly significant  (p  &lt; .001).

b  Significant (.001 C p  &lt; .05).

c  Not  significant (p  &gt; .05).

I. These districts contain all twelve  Indian cities with  a population in excess of one  million  as well  as most cities with  a population  of 400,000 or more. Class I cities  were  found  even  in  rural districts: thirty-eight  of  them  had Class I cities, and thirty-one  rural districts had  cities with  populations  between  100,000  and 200,000. Only a small number of the lowest level of Class I cities was  in  rural districts. This distribution is important because Indian urbanization results from the development  and proliferation of Class I cities, particularly those in  excess of 200,000 population.

Rural-urban  differences were analyzed with a t-test of significance. Mean values  of  the  occupational  and  demographic  variables were  calculated for both  groups  of  districts. A  rank order of  variables, based on  t-test significance, emerged  (Table II and Figs. 3 and 4). Male cultivators, female cultivators, and females per 1,000  males were predominantly rural characteristics

## OCCUPATIONAL  VARIABLES  IN INDIA,1981 (by "rural"  and "urban"  districts)

FIG. 3-Occupational variables  1981.

<!-- image -->

with  high  significance  levels.  Variables that  emerged  primarily  as  urban characteristics were  other  male  workers, other  female  workers, female  literacy, male literacy, female nonworkers, density  of population, and female household  workers.

## CORRELATES  OF  URBANIZATION

Cultivation of land is a rural  activity, and high percentages of individuals dependent on agriculture have been repeatedly documented.7 The character and status of farming depend  on the agricultural potential of the land, the key  resource in  a  rural economy.8 Because cultivators  are involved  with

7India: The Social Anthropology of a Civilization  (edited  by David  M. Schneider;  Englewood  Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1971), 38.

8  Bina  Srivastava  and  R.  Ramachandran,  The  Rural-Urban  Fringe,  Indian Geographical  Journal 49 (1974): 2-3.

## DEMOGRAPHIC  VARIABLES  IN INDIA,  1981 (by "rural" and  "urban" districts)

FIG.  4-Demographic variables  1981.

<!-- image -->

tilling, sowing,  harvesting, processing of crops, and land management, they are essentially rural residents. The number of cultivators has strong negative correlation with  urbanization.  Number  of  male  cultivators,  the  best  and strongest indicator of rural character,  shows  the highest negative correlation with  urbanization and the most significant t-value. This result confirms the appropriateness of the census criterion of a minimal 75 percent of the working male population in nonagricultural pursuits. However,  the definition of cultivators used in  the  census  is often  misleading.  In some  instances, they are merely  periodic labor, but  in  other  instances  they  do  all  the  work  or receive  aid  from  household  members.  In  addition,  cultivators  who  own small parcels often supplement  income  by working in nearby urban places during times when  labor input  for the fields is low.9

Although agricultural  laborers  are assumed to be a rural group, Pearson's correlation indicates  a  weak  relationship,  and  hence  agricultural laborers cannot  be  considered  as  significant  a  rural indicator as  cultivators. Some laborers own  land, but the holdings  are insufficient to provide basic subsistence  for a family.  In 1976-77, 72.6 percent of rural holdings  had less than five  acres.10  Many  smallholders,  who  generally  own  less  than  an  acre, are

9  T. K. Mahanti,  Wage Rates of Agricultural  Laborers in West Bengal, Indian  Journal  of Regional  Science 7 (1975): 121.

10 Sixth  Five  Year Plan  1980-85  (Delhi:  Government  of  India  Planning  Commission, 1980[?]), 8.

----------:----:::::::::-

considered agricultural laborers, even  though  they  are not  landless.  These persons are among the first to be affected by "rural  push" and "urban pull" factors that  promote  rural-to-urban migration."  Agricultural laborers are also prone to seasonal migration. They are not tied to the land as are cultivators. Some  of  these  migrants  leave  families  behind.  Female agricultural laborers thus  constitute  a  higher  percentage  of  the  total  working  female population  than  male  agricultural laborers do  of  the  total  working  male population.  The t-test results clearly show  this  pattern. Nevertheless,  male agricultural laborers are  a  better rural  indicator than their female counterparts.

Workers engaged  in  household  labor are both  self-employed  and  employed  by  others  in  small  groups.  They  engage  in  handicraft production and  small  industrial  operations.  Although  the  handicraft-oriented household  workers are found  in  rural and urban areas, the  small industrial operations are essentially urban and tend to be the more numerous of the two categories.  Household workers have a statistically  significant correlation  with urbanization. Although  females have  a slightly  higher  positive  correlation than males with urbanization, the values are not so reliable, because women constitute a small percentage of the total working  population.

The category, other workers, which  includes  chiefly  industrial and service  personnel,  has the  highest  positive,  statistically significant correlation with  urbanization. The urban occupational structure is as closely related to manufacturing and service as the rural function  is to cultivation. The combination  of  industry,  trade, and  transportation was  the  significant  occupational  grouping  for a city  population.12  Economic development  almost  invariably results in an accentuation of the process of urbanization and implies a change in the occupational structure of the work force in favor of nonagricultural activities. Some service employment  is found in rural areas, but the proportion of  the  total rural work  force is  low.  Certain rural-area  services are performed by  traditional caste-based groups  like  barbers, priests, and butchers; these individuals are generally cultivators or agricultural laborers. The category, other female workers, has a slightly higher positive correlation with  urbanization than other male workers. T-values, though  very  significant, show  the former with  a slightly  higher significance than the males. In rural areas female workers are mostly  agricultural, but in urban areas they are employed  in domestic work, construction, and factory labor.

Marginal workers  are defined  as  casual or  part-time. Females are the principal component  in  this  group  in  both  rural and urban areas, because they are not traditionally the wage earners of a family. The female marginal group is a better indicator of rural districts than the male category.

11  B.  F.  Hoselitz, Urbanization and  Economic  Growth  in  Asia,  Economic  Development and Cultural Change  6 (1957): 45.

12 Davis,  footnote  5 above,  139.

RURAL-URBAN

<!-- image -->

CONTINUUM

FIG.  5-Model of  rural-urban  continuum.

The literacy rate is also considered to be closely  related to urban development. A high literacy rate strongly correlates with  a high  degree of modernization in agriculture.13 The general level of literacy is higher among the urban population  than  among  the  rural dwellers,  but  in  both  subgroups literacy among  females  is  considerably  below  the  level  for males.  The  literacy rate shows  a  strong  positive  correlation with  urbanization,  but  the rate for females indicates a stronger correlation than does  the  male rate. It is  presumed  that the  increase in  literacy by  city  size  is  much  sharper for females than for males, because females are freed from traditional roles and modes of behavior in urban areas. Thus, more urban women  attend school and, as a subgroup,  surpass the  literacy levels  of  their  rural counterparts. Female literacy is  especially  prevalent  among  the  urban middle  class and elite.  In  general  literacy  is  higher  in  urban  areas than  in  rural ones,  but sexual equivalency  for literacy is not approached even  in the largest cities.

The ratio of females per 1,000 males is a reliable rural characteristic  that shows a negative correlation with  urbanization. The rural sex ratio for India was 950/1,000 against an urban figure of 890/ 1,000  in 1981.  The lower urban sex  ratio can be  attributed to  the  large number  of  males  who  seek  urban employment  and the limited opportunities for females because of traditional societal attitudes. The increased cost of family housing  in urban areas is also an  important  factor that  discourages  male  migrants  from  taking  families with  them.  Moreover, the  purdah system  is  widely  prevalent  in  northern India and limits female migration to cities. Consequently  males migrate for

13  S.  Gosal  Gurdev,  Spatial  Variation  of  Indian  Literacy,  in Indian  Cultural  Patterns  and  Processes (edited  by  Allen  G. Noble  and  Ashok  K. Dutt; Boulder: Westview  Press,  1982), 36-40.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

/&lt;\~~~~~~~~~~~~DENSI

/F~~~~~~~~~~~~EMALE

education, employment,  or both. Male urban dominance may also be related to  the  economic  bases of  modern  urbanization,  on  the  one  hand,  and  to Hindu and Muslim attitudes toward female employment,  on the other hand. Women are economically productive in rural areas as agricultural laborers.

As  expected, density  of  population  shows  a strong positive  correlation with  urbanization.  The  density  of  population  in  urban districts is  almost seven  times higher than the density  for rural districts in  1981. This statistic indicates  the  polarized  economic  development  in  a  country,  where  cities tend to offer more opportunities for the labor force.

The findings  of  this  study  are summarized  in  a descriptive  model,  indicating  factors  that  are  moderately  or  highly associated  with rural  or urban areas (Fig. 5). Household  employment  occurs in  both  areas but  is more  urban  than  rural, particularly for  females.  Male  cultivators were  a prime indicator of rurality, and other workers were  primarily urban. These two categories basically polarized each other. Although  both a high  density of population and a high male-to-female ratio are urban features, the former is  positively  associated  with  urbanization.  Female  marginal  workers  are chiefly  associated with  rural areas, while  female  nonworkers  are strongly urban. Male agricultural  laborers  are not as intensely associated with rurality as are cultivators, particularly males. A rural-urban continuum  evolves.  At one  end  is  a rural area with  a  high  proportion  of  male  cultivators and  a moderate proportion of male agricultural laborers,  female marginal workers, and  household  laborers. At  the  other  pole  is  an  urban area with  a  high proportion of other workers, high  population  density,  and high  female literacy, and  moderate proportion of  female  nonworkers  and  female  household laborers.

## CONCLUSION

In analyzing  socioeconomic  factors of  rural-urban differences in  India, this  study  confirms  some  conclusions  of  previous  investigations  like  the higher  female-male  ratio and  population  density  for  urban  areas. It also reveals certain characteristics  that have  been  unnoticed.  Cultivators, particularly males, are much  better than  agricultural laborers as an indicator of rural character.  Female agricultural laborers are less significantly  correlated than males with  urbanization. Although  persons engaged  in  household  labor are found  in  both  rural and urban areas, they  are more prominent  in the latter. The category, other workers, includes both manufacture and service and is a highly  significant indicator of urbanization, although Pearson's correlation shows  females to be more urban, while  the t-value is higher for males. Literacy has a highly  significant  correlation with  urbanization,  but female literacy is a better indicator than male literacy of urbanization.

This study also demonstrates that investigations, based on large statistical units  like  a country  or state, do  not  yield  the  meaningful  results  possible from lower-level areas  like districts.  The rural-urban  continuum model, which

indicates  demographic  change  for  specific  characteristics, is  applicable  to other developing  countries, where  such shifts are evident.  This application is  less  demanding  of  data and  time,  because the  continuum  can be  established  from the record of one  census year.