## American Geographical Society

Peri-Urban Agroforestry in the Brazilian Amazon Author(s): Vanessa A. V. Slinger

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 90, No. 2 (Apr., 2000), pp. 177-190

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/216117 .

Accessed: 23/01/2015 19:21

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## PERI-URBAN  AGROFORESTRY IN THE BRAZILIAN  AMAZON*

## VANESSA  A. V. SLINGER

ABSTRACT. Together, urbanization  and  the search  for  sustainable  development  present  a  dilemma in the Brazilian  Amazon: how to accommodate an expanding urban population while creating  and maintaining sustainable  production systems  that feed the people and manage  the forest.  A unique peri-urban  agroforestry  project,  implemented  by a municipal government in western  Amazonia  and concerned  with a  citywide  influx  of rural  agriculturalists  and former  forest-dwelling  extractive  producers,  is examined  as a source  of food and self-determination.  Peri-urban  agroforestry  seems to be a viable  option for other Amazonian cities that are  experiencing  increasing  urbanization  and its associated  problems.  Keywords:  agroforestry, Amazonia,  Brazil,  migration,  urbanization.

(Jf  agroforestry research has  progressed on  many a  front, there  remains lamentably little  known  about  the  informal agroforestry of  peri-urban settings. Still less  documented  are  planned  peri-urban agroforestry projects. The  small,  urban  backyard gardens have  by  and  large lived  outside the  realm of  formal urban research and  planning.  Instead, they  exist  as  unsponsored and  largely individual efforts, providing households with  nutrition and  subsistence (Alcorn 1990).  To  date  understudied, the development of  agrosilvopastoral systems that  combine perennial trees  and  shrubs with  animals and  annual crops  in  areas surrounding cities  presents an  attractive, if little  explored, opportunity for  urban planners and  policymakers working in  developing  countries to grapple with  food  provision and  with  urban social  concerns.

The  Municipal Pole  for  Agroforestry Production (Polo  Municipal de  Produsao Agroflorestal) isan  original alternative being  explored by  the  municipal government of  Rio  Branco, Acre, in  western Amazonia (Figure 1).  The  project addresses the  challenges of  urbanization created by  an  influx of  agriculturalists and  extractivists, mainly rubber tappers, from  rural areas. A  1920S decline in  the  price of  natural rubber from Brazil was  initially driven by  elevated rubber production on Asian  plantations and then  followed by  improved profits to  be  gleaned from  the  mass  production of synthetic  rubber. Agroforestry was  adopted as  an  alternative strategy that  could  potentially  produce food,  generate income, and  combat hunger and  other social  problems experienced in  city  slums  (Prefeitura de  Rio  Branco 1993). The  experience of  the  Agroforestry Production project compares favorably with  low-income housing initiatives,

* The  field  research for  this  paper was  funded by  grants from  the  Charles Wagley Endowed Fellowship Fund  and the  Tinker Foundation, both  through the  Center for  Latin American Studies at  the  University of Florida. Iwish also  to thank  the  Tropical Conservation and  Development Program for  generous financial support. I am  very grateful to  the  following persons: Marianne Schmink, Peter Hildebrand, Nigel  Smith,  Edward Malecki, and  my most  competent research assistant, Paula Silveira. Several people  from  the  nongovernmental organization Research and  Extension in  Agroforestry Systems of  Acre  helped me  in  numerous ways, from  linking me  up  with  a research assistant  o  being  an  intermediary contact with  the  municipal government of  Rio  Branco. Most  of  all,  I wish  to  thank the  participants from  the  Municipal Pole  for  Agroforestry Production who  graciously gave  of  their precious time,  knowledge, and  hospitality.

m' MS. SLINGER  is a  doctoral  candidate  in  geography  at  the  University  of Florida,  Gainesville,  Florida 32611-7315.

a  more  traditional  government  response.  Peri-urban agroforestry has  great  potential to reduce  some of the socioeconomic  challenges  of urbanization in Amazonia.

## URBANIZATION  IN THE BRAZILIAN AMAZON

Over  the past  twenty-five  years  colonization  of the Brazilian Amazon  has been the subject  of extensive  research and  writing,  but  studies  of the  frontiers  of Amazonian colonization rarely  consider  concurrent  urban  developments  (Volbeda  1984).  Although the  Amazon  is  journalistically thought  of as  an  "agricultural frontier," in reality  the population is highly  concentrated  in urban  areas  (Godfrey  1990; Martine 1993;  Browder and Godfrey 1997).

Driving  migration  and  concurrent urbanization  in  the  Brazilian Amazon  are  the concentration  of land  in the  hands  of large  property holders,  the  lack  of formal  title to  properties, stagnation  in  areas once  devoted  to  extraction  and  agriculture, and  the "pull"  of possibly  better  urban  services  and  employment  opportunities  (Ramos  de Castro 1989;  Schmink and Wood 1992). Stagnation in agriculture and in such extractive economies as rubber  tapping  and brazil-nut  collecting  has influenced  migration to the cities  of Manaus,  Belem,  and  Rio  Branco  (Sawyer 1990). Urbanization  in the Amazon  increased from 36 percent in 1970  to 59 percent in 1990,  and in Acre the proportion  of people  living  in  urban  areas doubled  from  28  percent  in  1970 to 55  percent in 1990  (Sawyer 1990).

High urbanization  rates  in the Brazilian  Amazon are  provoking  many of the same problems  that affect  the three-quarters of the Brazilian  population  living in cities.  Migrants  have  poor  access  to government  and  to state  resources and  services: limited piped  water,  sewage  treatment,  electricity, garbage  disposal,  education,  and medical  assistance. Spontaneous  invasions  of migrants  to the  urban  periphery  are  a reaction  to a shortage  of housing.  High unemployment  and  work  in the informal sector  appear  in response  to the lack  of job opportunities.

In  Acre  the  capital,  Rio  Branco, shelters at  least  half  of  the  state's total  population; close  to 80  percent  of  the  inhabitants are  migrants  from  the  rural zone.  The  declining rubber-extraction economy  and  the  penetration of cattle  ranching into  the  tiny  western state spawned migration to Rio Branco in the 1980s. In 1970 Rio Branco had close to 35,000  inhabitants, but by the mid-1ggos  the city's  population  surpassed 190,000. Fewer  than  half  of the arriving migrants  had  resources sufficient  to maintain  themselves  for  even  a  single  month;  another  25  percent  could  fund  but  one to  two  months (Schmink  and  Cordeiro 1992). The  products  of  this  were  decisive pockets  of  misery.

Perhaps  one-third  of Rio Branco's working-age  population  has steady  employment  (Pinto  de  Oliveira 1982). Inhabitants of  the  poorer  districts of  Rio  Branco, including  a  large  proportion  of former  rubber tappers and  agriculturalists, have  low  incomes and  lack  professional qualifications (Alves  1995). Although  an  estimated 38  percent  of the  resident workers  receive a minimum  monthly  salary-roughly u.s.$70.00 per month in 1993-another  27 percent  in the informal  sector  earn  still  less (SMAA  1993).

The rural-urban  exodus burdens  urban  services.  The municipal government strains  to ensure  that  there  is  enough  food in the  city  for  its  people.  Almost  80  per-

FIG. 1.

<!-- image -->

cent of the commercial  products  in the markets  of Rio Branco  originate  in neighboring states  and from the central  and southern  areas  of Brazil.

If  plans for paving Brazilian national highways BR-364  and BR-317 to Acre's  borders with Bolivia are realized,  rural  migrants  will have even greater  access  to the Amazonian urban centers  of Rio Branco,  Placido  de Castro,  Sena  Madureira, Xapurn,  and Brasileia  (Figure  1).  With that will develop  greater  pressure  to meet the needs of growing  populations.

## AGROFORESTRY IN Rio  BRANCO

The  first  Municipal  Pole  for  Agroforestry Production,  established in  November  1993, was seen as a means to provide  a home, work,  and income for  needy families  who were accumulating in city slums. The project  entailed the resettlement  of slum dwellers  to plots  of  land  in  the  municipality  of Rio  Branco, to produce  food for  their subsistence  and  to supply  markets  in Rio  Branco. In  this  article  I  focus  on the  initial Pole,  located  in Floresta  (Figure 2). It  is  an  agrosilvopastoral system  combining  annual  crops,  perennial  fruit  trees  and  shrubs, and  small  livestock. The  land  designated for the project  was  previously  a cattle  ranch  with degraded  pasture.

Although  the Municipal  Secretariat for  Agriculture and  Provisions  was  responsible  for  the  coordination  of the  Pole,  the  project  was  jointly  funded  by  the  superintendent for the development of the Amazon, the Program  of Protection of the

<!-- image -->

fom(ICA)

ashihas$0000

e  hushld(rid an

996

Enionme(NCA.Etiae for Inienugovermunit-ires,ted theloniciatiovernmten Aaof rio asetl betwee  sixt $30,00 peigt househ  ldFiesdm and wih1996). f ndamai Environment for Indigenous Communities, and the municipal government of Rio Branco. Put into effect at a total cost of u.s.$410,524, the Floresta project aimed to settle between sixty and eighty families on land with a minimum of 3 and a maxiform (INcRA). Estimates for government-directed colonization in the Amazon run as high as $300,000 per household (Friedmann 1996).

Other projects  in the 1970S, known as "Directed  Settlement  Projects" (PADS), whose principal  objective  was to settle  people in the countryside  to produce  food, have  been assessed  as  unsuccessful  (Schmink  and  Wood  1992).  Over  time,  the  negative  results  of PADS  have  become evident:  concentration  of land  and  the accelerated expansion of extensive  cattle ranching,  whose consequences  in the region are already  well known, deforestation,  soil degradation,  and  no shortage  of accompanying social conflict. The Agroforestry  Production  project  has been promoted as a better  alternative because  its  design  calls  for  a  rigorous  selection  process,  high  levels of technical  and equipment  support,  focus on a relatively small area  for intensive management, reliance on a production system considered  environmentally  and economically  beneficial,  and  proximity  to local  markets.

The selection process gave priority to families  with some tradition in agroextractive  activities  that  were  living  in peripheral locations  susceptible  to flooding and invasions.  Families  who owned no land were  also given priority.  The participants  were  either  unemployed  or  held  jobs  in  the  informal  sector. The  people  chosen had a family income of less than two minimum salaries.  Families  with children (available  for  labor)  were  also  favored. Chosen  families  had  to  be  willing  to return  to a rural  zone close to the city and to demonstrate  their  interest  by participating  in meetings called  by the municipal  secretary of agriculture.

Although project  participants  were  not given  actual  title to the land,  they  were granted  use of it for  five  to ten  years,  and  possibly  longer  (politics  permitting),  but they  were  not permitted  to sell  it.  The  main  concern  about  giving  land  title  to individual participants  was that they would sell their  lots and return  posthaste  to the city.  INCRA  is the sole government  agency  with authority  to carry  out agrarian reform in the Brazilian  Amazon,  so the municipal  government  cannot  vest  title  with participants. The Rio Branco government hopes that, if the participants show strength  through  organization  in  a  cooperative or  association,  eventually INCRA Will give the land to the cooperative.

Growing  interest  in  the  concept  of  the  Pole  and  its  potential  for  addressing  urban social  concerns  is  spreading within  Acre  and  across  Brazil. Although  power  changed hands in local  elections  of October  1996,  the Pole  is surviving  the  vortex  of political power  change.  The  new  mayor,  Mauri  Sergio,  though  part  of the  former  opposition, intends to seek additional  funding  to expand  the number  of Poles.

Another  hallmark  of the Municipal  Pole  for  Agroforestry Production  is the infrastructural and technical  support  it has received.  Seeds,  seedlings,  animals,  tools, and  a  tractor were  first  acquired for  project  use.  After  a  participating family  had  been on a lot for six months,  living  in a temporary  house and  beginning  cultivation,  the municipal  government  provided  construction  material  and  help to build  a  permanent dwelling  that received  electricity.

The municipal  government  considered  proximity  and easy  road  access  factors important  to success  of  the  project. These  would  allow  for  easy  marketing of  any  surplus  produce  through  wholesale,  retail,  and  street  markets  in Rio  Branco. The  project budgeted  for  a  six-ton truck  that  would  be the  initial  form  of transportation for

the  participants' produce.  The neighboring  municipalities  of Plaicido de Castro,  Senador  Guiomard,  Feij6,  Xapuri,  and  Tarauaca' were  also  outlets  for  surplus.  The adjacent  state  of Rondonia  was  a  potential  market, vast  in  the  size  of its  population  and ready  with year-round  transportation.

Assistance  in developing  agroforestry systems  arrived in  the  form  of technicians from  the Department  of Vegetal  and  Animal  Production  in the  Municipal  Secretariat  of  Agriculture and  Food  Supply. Other  expertise was  solicited  from  such  research institutions  as  the Federal University  of Acre,  the  Technological Foundation  of the State  of  Acre,  the  Brazilian Enterprise for  Agricultural Research, the  Brazilian Enterprise  for  Technical Assistance  for  Rural  Extension,  the National  Institute  for  Amazon Research,  and Research  and Extension  in Agroforestry  Systems  of Acre.  For success,  the  municipal  government  depended  on the  organization of the  beneficiaries into a cooperative.

## ECONOMIC AND  ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFITS

Although  agroforestry systems  do not maintain  the original  natural  vegetation,  researchers  recognize  the  benefits  they  provide  to soil,  crops,  and  farmers  (Lundgren and Raintree 1983;  Young 1987;  Anderson 1990; Current, Lutz,  and Scherr  1995;  Smith and  others  1995). Agrosilvopastoral systems,  multistoried and  diverse  in  their  nature, can  provide  food for  subsistence living  and  sale,  stable  yields,  varied  products,  plant protein energy,  nutrients  in the form of minerals  and  vitamins,  wastes  for animal feed,  soil and  water  conservation  and  management,  nitrogen  fixation,  pest  control, and  continual production throughout the  year  (Haryadi  1975;  Nair  1990).  The benefits  are  extraordinarily varied,  as  the people  of Floresta  have  discovered.

Forty-eight  families-276 people-were selected  to settle  on 210  hectares  of land in a  peri-urban  area  of Rio  Branco. Adults  above  the  age  of fifteen  constitute  45  percent  of this  population;  55 percent  of  the  settlers are  male.  A  household  usually  comprises  a father,  a mother,  and children  and  may  also  include  grandparents, in-laws, cousins,  or other  members  of the extended  family.  During  the summer  of 1995  I interviewed  forty-four  of the families.

The participants' lot sizes  range  from  2.2 to 4.3  hectares,  averaging 3.6  hectares (Figure  3).  Plantings  comprise  fruit-tree  crops,  palms,  shrubs, vines,  and  other  perennials,  along  with annual  vegetables  and  other  crops-in  all,  thirty-one  perennials and twenty-eight  annuals  (Table  I). Although  the original  plan for the Pole failed even  to consider  the  planting  of  vegetable  gardens,  almost  three-quarters of the  participants  have  taken  to cultivating  vegetables, using family  labor.

Most of the items produced  are  eaten  by local families,  but many  participants have  sold more than 20 percent  of their  annual  harvest-the amount that  the municipal government  expected  to be the likely  ceiling.  For  selling  this produce,  the municipal government  created  open-air  stalls  in a Rio Branco  neighborhood,  so participants have  found  an  enduring  market  not  only  in  local  restaurants but  also  in these street  stalls.  A small  amount  of produce  is bought  by  a  middleman,  who later resells  it in urban  markets.

When I asked  participants  why they moved to the Pole,  they offered  two main reasons:  They  did not own their  own house,  or they  did  not have  a  job or  the financial  wherewithal to survive  in  Rio  Branco. In  fact,  prior  to  moving  to  the  Pole  only  59 percent  of the households had heads  with any form of employment-temporary,

FIG. 3-A typical household plot  in  the  Municipal Pole  for  Agroforestry Production, Floresta. Water is  obtained from  several  akes within  the  Pole  and  also  from wells  dug  by  the  participants. Participants  bathe  and  wash their  clothes at  the  lakeside. (Photograph by the  author, June  1995)

<!-- image -->

part-time,  or  permanent.  In  the  Pole,  however, everyhousehold  head  has  a  job.  Likewise,  before  moving  to the Pole  just  34  percent  of the  participants  owned their  own home; now each family  in the Pole  owns the house in which it lives.

Participants  like the way  their quality  of life has changed  since they arrived  at the Pole.  More  than  89  percent  of them  stated  that,  after  approximately a  year  and  a

TABLE  I-CROP PLANTS FOUND ON  THE FARMS  OF  THE  AGROFORESTRY  POLE PROJECT, RIo  BRANCO, ACRE, BRAZIL, 1995

| ENGLISH NAME                    | PORTUGUESE NAME                 | SCIENTIFIC NAME            | USE             |
|---------------------------------|---------------------------------|----------------------------|-----------------|
| Trees                           |                                 |                            |                 |
| Acaii                           | Acai                            | Euterpe oleracea           | Food            |
| Araca-boi                       | AraSa-boi                       | Eugeniastipitata           | Food            |
| Avocado                         | Abacate                         | PerseaamericanaMill.       | Food            |
| Bacaba                          | Bacaba                          | Oenocarpus mapora          | Food            |
| Bacuri                          | Bacuri                          | PlatoniainsignisMart.      | Food            |
| Breadfruit                      | Fruta-pao                       | Artocarpus altilis         | Food            |
| Cacao                           | Cacao                           | Theobroma cacao            | Food, chocolate |
| Caimito                         | Abiu                            | PouteriacaimitoRadik       | Food            |
| Cashew                          | Caju                            | Anacardiumoccidentale      | Food            |
| Coconut                         | Coco                            | Cocosnucifera              | Food            |
| CupuaSu                         | CupuaSu                         | Theobroma grandiflorum     | Food            |
| Inga                            | Inga                            | Ingaspp.                   | Food            |
| Jackfruit                       | Jaca                            | Artocarpus heterophyllus   | Food            |
| Jambo                           | Jambo                           | Eugeniamalaccensis         | Food            |
| Lime                            | Limao                           | Citrusaurantifolia         | Food            |
| Mahogany                        | Mogno                           | Swieteniamacrophylla       | Wood            |
| Mango                           | Manga                           | Mangifera indica           | Food            |
| Orange                          | Laranja                         | Citrus sinensis            | Food            |
| Papaya                          | Mamao                           | Caricapapaya               | Food            |
| Peachpalm                       | Pupunha                         | Bactris gasipaes           | Food,oil Food   |
| Pitinga                         | Pitinga                         | Eugeniauniflora            |                 |
| Soursop                         | Graviola                        | Annonamuricata             | Food            |
| Starfruit                       | Carambola                       | Averrhoa carambola         | Food            |
| Tangerine                       | Tangerina                       | Citrusreticulata           | Food            |
| Shrubs,vines,andotherperennials | Shrubs,vines,andotherperennials |                            |                 |
| Annatto                         | Urucu                           | Bixaorellana               | Food,dye        |
| Banana                          | Banana                          | Musaspp.                   | Food            |
| Barbadoscherry                  | Acerola                         | Malpighiaglabra            | Food            |
| Blackpepper                     | Pimentado reino                 | Pipernigrum                | Spice           |
| Coffee                          | Cafe                            | Coffeaspp.                 | Coffee          |
| Passionfruit                    | Maracuja                        | Passiflora edulis          | Food            |
| Pineapple                       | Abacaxi                         | Ananascomosus              | Food            |
| Annuals                         |                                 |                            |                 |
| Cabbage                         | Repolho                         | Brassica oleracea          | Food            |
| Cassava                         | Mandioca                        | Manihotesculenta           | Tuber           |
| Cauliflower                     | Couveflor                       | Brassica oleracea botrytis | Food            |
| Chard                           | Acelga                          | Betavulgaris               | Food            |
| Chicory                         | Chicoria                        | Cichoriumintybus           | Food            |
| Common bean                     | Feijao                          | Phaseolusvulgaris          | Food            |
| Corn                            | Milho                           | Zeamays                    | Food            |
| Cotton                          | Algodao                         | Gossypium spp.             | Fiber           |
| Cucumber                        | Pepino                          | Cucumismelo                | Food            |
| Eggplant                        | Beringela                       | Solanummelongena           | Food            |
| Lettuce                         | Alface                          | Lactucasativa              | Food            |
| Mustard                         | Mustarda                        | Brassica juncea            | Food            |
| Okra                            | Quiabo                          | Hibiscusesculentus         | Food            |
| Onion                           | Cebola                          | Alliumcepa                 | Food            |
| Parsley                         | Salsa                           | Petroselinum crispum       | Herb            |
| Pepper                          | Pimentao                        | Capsicum spp.              | Food            |
| Radish                          | Rabonete                        | Raphanussativus            | Herb            |

TABLE  I-Continued

| ENGLISH NAME                                   | PORTUGUESE NAME                      | SCIENTIFIC NAME                                                           | USE                       |
|------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------|
| Annuals,Continued                              |                                      |                                                                           |                           |
| Rice Springgreens Sugarcane Sweetpotato Tomato | Arroz Couve Canade Batatadoce Tomate | Oryzasativa Brassica oleracea Succharium spp. Ipomoeabatatas Lycopersicon | Food Food Juice Food Food |
|                                                | a~ucar                               |                                                                           |                           |
|                                                |                                      | esculentum                                                                |                           |

Sources: Purseglove  1968; Cavalcante 1976; Stephens  1988.

half there,  their family's  situation  had improved;  98 percent  said  that  they felt  the Pole  would improve  their  lives  in the future.  The  nearly  universal  optimism of this response is especially apparent  when compared  with the research  of Marianne Schmink  and  Mancio Lima  Cordeiro,  who asked  residents  of Rio  Branco  about  the city's ability to improve their lives (1992). Responses showed that only 35  percent of those respondents  believed that their situation  had improved,  though 54 percent said that they felt the city would improve  their  lives in the future.

The rate  of abandonment  of the Pole  has  been  low,  and  the  majority  of the  participants  do not plan  to return  to Rio  Branco-nor do they  anticipate that  their  children  will  move  to the  city.  After  all,  the  participants' need  for  employment  and  home ownership  are  being  met in the Pole.  Their  level  of commitment  to the Pole  is  high, and so is expectation  that  their  future  will be based  on life there.

Changes  in the  quality  of  life  are  difficult to measure,  for  they  depend  on an  individual's  decision about  what contributes  to a  bettered  standard  of living.  Basic  necessities,  though, such as food and  health,  are  inescapable. A quantitative  measure that is a suitable  indicator  of improved  quality  of life is data  on food consumption and  on health.  More  than  three-quarters of the  participants told  me  that  their  health and diet had improved  since  they  arrived at  the  Pole.  For  some of them,  dietary  improvement  means more meals  per day,  more  total  food per  day,  or more  variety  in the food. They might, however,  have  noted a decrease  in the number  of meals,  in quantity  of food, or in variety,  because  they are  assured,  by virtue of being at the Pole,  that  they  will  have  something  to eat  even  if  they  lack  cash  to  buy  goods  and  that their  meals  will  improve  even  more  with  the  passage of time  and  with  increased  production.  The  diversity  of species  in  the  agroforestry systems  increases  the  variety  of produce collected and also allows  for a continual,  year-around  supply  of food for subsistence  and sale.

Almost three-quarters  of the participants  said  that  the money they earn  every month meets  their  household  expenses.  For  financially strapped  families,  manioc  is an important  survival  crop:  20 percent  of those  whose  monthly  cash  income  fails  to meet expenses  responded  that  they eat manioc.

I  developed  a  linear  programming  model using  the objective  function  of maximizing income. Model constraints  included  household consumption,  labor  avail-

FIG. 4-A low-income housing  complex  in  Rio  Branco, Acre,  Brazil  (Photograph by  the  author, June  1995)

<!-- image -->

ability,  and land area.  Results,  simulating  a  typical  farm  in the  Municipal  Pole for Agroforestry  Production,  showed  income from  surplus  food sales  steadily  increasing  year  by  year  as  the  agroforestry system  matured.  By  the fourth  year  surplus  produce was an  ticipated  from  most fruit  trees,  which  would  finally  have  come into full production.  Peach  palm,  cupuaqu,  a~ai,  Barbados cherry,  soursop,  banana,  papaya, passion fruit,  pineapple,  chickens,  and  vegetables  could  potentially  be sold for an annual  household cash income equivalent  to u.S.$13,088.

Municipal government  officials  had anticipated  that within the first  eighteen months participants  would be making  three  to four  minimum salaries  per  month, equivalent  to U.S.$210-$280. Furthermore, they  estimated  that  when the  integrated system was producing plentifully the farmers  would be making an income of u.S.$11,000-$13,000 per  year.  In  the first  year  though,  income from  sales  of surplus proved  low.  The  government's short-term  expectation  for  the  participants  seemed overly  optimistic,  much  higher  than  the results  of the linear  program.

Administrators  promoted  the  Municipal  Pole  for  Agroforestry Production  as  a so-called  alternative way  of  dealing  with  lack  of  housing,  unemployment,  and  hunger. They compared  the Pole  with COHABS  (low-income housing complexes).  The COHAB  system  of providing  mass  housing  for  lower-income  families  was  developed by the Brazilian  Association  Of  COHABS in many  of the Brazilian  states  (Figure  4). Comparison  of the Pole  with Oscar  Passos,  a low-income  housing complex  in Rio Branco,  reveals  an  almost  equal  cost  of  settling  a  resident: U.S.$5,132-$6,842  for each

of the  sixty  to eighty  families  at  the  Pole,  and U.S.$5,552 for  each  of  the  197  families  in Oscar  Passos.

Nonmonetary differences  exist between the two projects,  however.  Oscar  Passos, like the Pole, addresses  the problems of shortage  of housing and absent or deficient  services,  including  the provision  of water  and  electricity  and  the disposal of sewage.  However,  unlike  the Pole  participants, the residents  of Oscar  Passos  are not provided  with employment opportunities  or with any other  way  to achieve  a subsistence  living.  Pole  participants  have  acquired  a means  to feed  themselves  and make a steady income using skills  they already  possess.  The Pole project  has decreased  the population stress  on Rio Branco  and, at the same time, has provided food for  the city's  inhabitants.  Oscar  Passos  created  urban  housing  but nothing in the way of opportunities  for migrants  with rural  skills.

In 1995  residents  of all  group-housing  projects  in Acre,  except  for Oscar  Passos, were  required  to earn  a  minimum  of three  to four  minimum  salaries, the  equivalent of U.S.$210-$28o per  month (Ferreira Germono  de  Ara "o  1995); those  in Oscar  Passos needed  one and  a half  minimum  salaries, about  u.s.$0oo. That  Oscar  Passos  was the sole rock-bottom  minimum-income  housing  in Rio  Branco  available to families from rural  areas  spells  out the  limited  options  for  migrants. Migrants  often  have  no choice  but  to  rely  on  their  urban  relatives for  a  temporary or  permanent  place  to  liveor to crowd  into small  houses in precarious locations  on the periphery  of the city.

## ACHIEVEMENTS AND FAILURES OF THE POLE

Many  of  the  municipal  government's specific  goals  for  the  Pole  for  Agroforestry Production have  been achieved.  The  project  resettled  city-bound  rural  migrants  in an area  of agricultural  production.  Adequate  conditions have  been created  to induce Pole participants  to remain  permanently  in the countryside.  These conditions favored  the creation  of agroforestry systems  that  have  given  participants new  job opportunities and an enduring-and  rising-source of income.  The ability  to rely  on produce  of the  land  in  times  of hardship is  hardly  something  to  be  underrated, especially  in Brazil,  where  the traditions  of landless  revolt  sometimes  involve  violence and  political  unrest.  Furthermore, the  use  of diverse,  multispecied  agroforestry systems  has  provided  participants with a  striking  degree  of  economic  and  ecological  security against  low product  prices  and  pest attacks.

The total  population  of the  Pole,  276  people,  is  too small  for  the  project  to have  a large  impact  on poverty  in the peripheral  areas  of Rio Branco.  On the other  hand, there is no dodging the optimistic sign that action has been taken  to address  the problems associated  with peripheral  areas.  The perceived  success  of the Agroforestry Production  project  has already  led to the creation  of similar  projects;  wider adoption could have  a considerable  impact  on the alleviation  of poverty.

That  participants are  meeting  their  subsistence needs  also  means  the  Rio  Branco market  has  been relieved  of that  responsibility; thus the project  is a respectable net contributor  to the  local  economy.  The  need  to import  produce  from  other  states  has been reduced,  and  the  participants meet  their  subsistence needs  and  acquire  a  steady

cash  flow.  That  said,  the administrative structure  of the Pole  is  top-down.  It is also heavily  subsidized  by  the national  and  state  governments. The implications  for  sustainability  of the  Pole,  in  light  of such  large  external  investment,  needs  to be considered.

## A SOLUTION FOR OTHER  CITIES?

As  the  Amazon  has  become  increasingly urbanized, efforts  to  sustainably manage  the rain  forest  have  strengthened. Widespread  acknowledgment of the potential  lack  of sustainability and  of  the  destructive consequences  of  current major  forms  of  land  use, such as  slash-and-burn  agriculture, cattle  production,  and  logging,  has  resulted  in a search  for  alternative land-use  systems  that  combine  economic,  social,  and  ecological sustainability (Anderson 1990; Uhl and Subler 1990; Smith and others 1995).  The two processes  of increased  urbanization and  the search  for  sustainable development  together  define  a  major  challenge in  the  Amazon:  to  accommodate the  expansion  of  the vast  Brazilian urban  population  while  creating and  maintaining sustainable production systems  that  can  both feed  the people  and  sustainably manage  the forest.

If  the  Municipal  Pole  for  Agroforestry Production  is  to be adopted  as  a strategy to address  problems  connected to urbanization  of Amazon cities, issues remain. Agroforestry  systems  modify the original  vegetation,  so they are  most appropriate for  areas that  are  already deforested  or  degraded. Although  agroforestry systems  aim at  sustainability, poor choice  of species  combinations,  poor management  practices, and lack  of people's  motivation  and understanding may  cause  agroforestry to fail, just as any  other form  of land use may  fail  (Nair  1993).

Another  concern  is  that  the  ability  of  the  participants to make  the  income  anticipated  by the municipal  government  is based  on subsidies  provided  by the government, on the project's  proximity  to the market,  and on the ease and low cost of transportation.  Typically,  resource-poor  rural  inhabitants  in the Amazon do not have  the  option  to  be involved  in  a  program like  the  Municipal Pole  for  Agroforestry Production.  The  Pole  is  being  used  to  address the  specific  problems  created in  the  city by  increasing urbanization. At  present, it  is  not  the  goal  of  the  municipal  government to use this  project  to address  the  broader  problems  of poor rural  inhabitants.  However,  it  is  undeniably  important  that  the  problems  of the  rural  resource-poor inhabitantbe addressed if  the  flow  of  migrants from  the  rural areas  to  the  city  is  to  abate.

Project  managers  need  to give  further consideration  to the  fact  that  Pole  participants  have  not been given  title  to the land  and  that  the amount  of time they  reside there  maybe  limited  to  between  five  and  ten  years. Because  of  those  limitations,  participants  may  opt  for  piling  up  short-term  gains,  growing  quick-maturing crops,  including annuals,  and in doing so may forego  the benefits  of the longer-term  fruit trees.  Lacking secure  tenure,  residents are  certainly far  less  likely  to  make  a  long-term investment  in  conserving  the  land.  Under  continual  production  of annuals, the  land will deteriorate  instead  of regenerating as  planned  under  tree  crops.

Consideration  is  being  given  to turning  the  land  over  to a  community  cooperative  or  association.  It  still  could  not  be  sold,  but  participants would at  least  have  a  le-

gal  bond to it.  The  success  of this  plan  relies  on the  creation  and  maintenance  of an effective  cooperative  or  association.  But  at  best,  cooperatives in  Amazonia  have  generally  worked  poorly.

The Agroforestry  Production  project  and its participants  rely  on the subsidies provided by the municipal government,  including access  to transportation,  machinery,  green  manure,  and technical  assistance. As long as  the municipal  government is active in the Pole these subsidies are guaranteed;  once the government decreases  its involvement in the area  there could be an associated  withdrawal  of these subsidies,  leaving  Pole  participants  to stand  on their  own.

The continued  presence  of the  participants on the  land  might  have  depended  on the maintenance  of the 1996  administration  in a position of power.  However,  the newly  elected  mayor  of Rio Branco,  Mauri  Sergio,  is continuing  and  expanding  the number of Agroforestry  Production  projects  around  Rio Branco.  On a  larger  scale, the former  mayor  of Rio Branco,  Jorge  Viana,  was  hired  by  the United  Nations  Development Program  to spend two years  working  as a consultant  to create  Poles  in other municipal  districts  in Acre,  starting  with  Xapuri  and  Tarauac-a.

The urbanization  of the Brazilian Amazon  is expected  to continue.  The  number of cities  in the Brazilian Amazon  with more  than  20,000 inhabitants  increased  from 7  to  20  between  1970  and  1980 (Ramos  de  Castro 1989)  and  then  to 250 in  1996,  when roughly 78  percent of  the  Brazilian population was  urbanized (IBGE  2000). The  decline of traditional  extractive activities  and  conflicts  over  land  will continue  to feed the process  of urbanization  in many  an  Amazonian  city.  Migrants, like  those in Rio Branco,  come  to  the  cities  without  much  education  and  lacking the  skills  for  anything other than rural  employment.  Municipal  Poles for Agroforestry  Production  may prove  significant  for these  Amazonian  cities  that  are  experiencing  problems  of increasing  urbanization without  a  concurrent increase  in  infrastructure and  services.

## REFERENCES

- Alcorn, J.  B.  1990. Indigenous  Agroforestry  Systems  in the Latin  American  Tropics.  In  Agroecology and Small  Farm  Development,  edited  by M.  A.  Altieri  and  S.  B.  Hecht,  203-218.  Boca  Raton,  Fla.: CRC  Press.
- Alves,  A.  1995. Plantarsolu,ces  (To  Create  Solutions).  Rio  Branco, Acre,  Brazil: Secretaria Municipal de Cultura  de Rio Branco.
- Anderson,  A. B.,  ed.  1990.  Alternatives to  Deforestation: Steps  Toward Sustainable  Use  of the  Amazon Rain Forest.  New York:  Columbia  University  Press.
- Browder,  J.  0.,  and  B.  J.  Godfrey. 1997. Rainforest Cities:  Urbanization, Development, and Globalization of the  Brazilian  Amazon.  New York: Columbia  University  Press.
- Cavalcante,  P.  B.  1976. Frutas  Comestiveis daAmazonia  (Edible  Fruits  of the  Amazon).  3d ed.  Belem, Brazil:  National Institute  for  Amazon  Research.
- Current,  D., E. Lutz,  and S. Scherr,  eds.  1995. Costs,  Benefits,  and Farmer  Adoption  of  Agroforestry: Project  Experience in CentralAmerica and  the  Caribbean. World  Bank  Environment  Paper  No. 14. Washington,  D.C.:  World  Bank.
- Ferreira Germono de Araujo,  M.  L. 1995. Interview  with  the  author.  Rio  Branco, Acre,  Brazil,  June.
- Fox, R. W.  1975. Urban Population Growth Trends  in Latin America.  Washington, D.C.: InterAmerican Development Bank.

Friedmann,  J. 1996. Borders,  Margins,  and Frontiers: Myth and Metaphor.  In  Frontiers  in Regional Development,  edited by Y.  Gradus  and H. Lithwick,  1-20.  Lanham,  Md.:  Rowman  &amp;  Littlefield. Godfrey,  B. J.  1990. Boom  Towns of the Amazon.  Geographical Review 8o (2):  103-117.

- Haryadi,  M.  M.  S.  S.  1975. Potential  Contribution  of Homegardening to  Nutrition  Intervention  Program  in Indonesia.  Paper  presented  at  the  Seminar  on Food  and  Nutrition,  Gadjah  Mada  University,  Yogyakarta, Indonesia.
- IBGE  [Instituto  Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatistica (Brazilian Institute  of Geography and Statistics)]. 2000.  Contagen  da  Populacao  1996.  [http://www.ibge.net/estatistica/populacao/contagem/default .shtm]  .
- Lundgren,  B.  O.,  and  J.  B.  Raintree. 1983. Sustained  Agroforestry. InAgricultural Researchfor Development:  Potentials  and  Challenges in  Asia,  edited  by  B.  Nestel,  37-49.  Report  of a  conference  held on 24-29 October  1982  in  Jakarta, Indonesia.  The  Hague:  International Service  for  National  Agricultural  Research.
- Martine,  G.  1993. Popula,ao,  meio  ambiente  e desenvolvimento: Verdades econtradi,ces  (Population, Environment and Development:  Truths  and Contradictions).  Campinas,  Brazil:  Universidade Estadual  de Campinas.
- Nair,  P.  K.  R.  1990.  Agroforestry: An Approach  to Sustainable  Land  Use in the Tropics.  In  Agroecology and Small  Farm  Development,  edited  by M. A. Altieri  and S. B. Hecht,  121-135. Boca Raton, Fla.:  CRC  Press.
- .  1993. An Introduction  to  Agroforestry. Dordrecht,  Netherlands,  and Boston: Kluwer  Academic Publishers.
- Pinto de Oliveira,  L.  A.  1982. 0 Sertanejo, O  Brabo e O  Posseiro: A Periferia de  Rio  Branco e  os  cem  anos de  andan,a  dapopula,aoAcreana  (The  Woodsman,  the  Newcomer,  and  the  Squatter: The  Periphery of Rio Branco  and  the Hundred  Years in the life  of the Population  of Acre).  Belo  Horizonte, Brazil:  Universidade  Federal  de Minas  Gerais.
- Prefeitura  de Rio Branco. 1993. Vida  nova  na  cidade: Relatorio das  a,es  de  Governo (New Life  in the City:  A Report  on Government  Activities).  Rio Branco,  Acre,  Brazil:  Prefeitura  de Rio Branco.
- Purseglove,  J.  W.  1968. Tropical Crops: Dicotyledons. 2  vols.  New York: John  Wiley and Sons.
- Ramos  de Castro,  E.  M.  1989. A questao  urbana  na  Amazonia  (The  Urban  Question  in  Amazonia).  In Estudos  e  problemas Amazonicos: Historia  social  e economica e temas  especiais (Amazonian  Studies and Problems:  Social  and  Economic  History  and  Special  Themes),  edited  by  the Secretaria de Estado  de  Educacao, 165-176. Belem,  Brazil: Instituto  do  Desenvolvimento Economico-Social do  Parn.
- Sawyer,  D. R.  1990.  Campesinato e ecologia  na Amazonia  (Peasantry  and Ecology  in the Amazon). Documentos de Trabalho,  3. Brasilia: Instituto  Sociedade,  Populac,o e Natureza.
- Schmink,  M., and M. L.  Cordeiro. 1992. Urbaniza,ao  na  Amazonia:  Mudan,as  economicos e demograficas  em Rio  Branco-Acre-Brasil (Urbanization  in the Amazon:  Economic  and Demographic Changes  in Rio Branco-Acre-Brazil). Rio  Branco,  Acre,  Brazil: University  of Florida  and  Universidade Federal  do Acre.
- Schmink,  M., and  C.  H.  Wood.  1992. Contested Frontiers in  Amazonia.  New  York: Columbia  University Press.
- SMAA [Secretaria  Municipal  de Agricultura  e Abastecimento  (Municipal  Secretariat of Agriculture and Food Supply)].  1993. The  Municipal  Pole  ofAgroforestry Production. Rio  Branco,  Acre,  Brazil:  Secretaria  Municipal  de Agricultura  e Abastecimento.
- Smith,  N. J.  H., T.  J.  Fik,  P.  de T.  Alvim,  I.  C.  Falesi,  and  E.  A.  S.  Serrao. 1995. Agroforestry  Developments and Potential  in the Brazilian  Amazon.  Land  Degradation and  Rehabilitation 6:  251-263.
- Stephens, J.  M.  1988. Manual of Minor Vegetables. Gainesville:  University  of Florida,  Institute  of Food and Agricultural  Services.
- Uhl, C.,  and  S.  Subler. 1990.  Japanese Agroforestry  in  Amazonia: A Case  Study  in Tome-Acu,  Brazil. InAlternatives to  Deforestation: Steps  Toward Sustainable Use  oftheAmazon  Rain  Forest, edited  by A. B.  Anderson,  152-166.  New York:  Columbia  University  Press.
- Volbeda,  S.  1984. Pionier  in  Het Qerwoud: Stedelyke ontwikkelingen aan een  agraisch kolonisatiefront in  het  Braziliaanse Amazonegebied (Pioneer  Towns  in the  Jungle: Urbanization  at  an  Agricultural Colonization Frontier  in the Brazilian  Amazon).  Nijmegen,  Netherlands: Geografisch  en Planologisch Instituut,  Katholieke  Universiteit.
- Young, A.  1987. The Potential of Agroforestry  for Soil Conservation  and Sustainable  Land  Use. ICRAF  Reprint  No. 39.  Reprinted  from  Seminar  on  Land  and Water Resources Management: Collected  Papers, edited  by  J.  Kozub,  291-306. Washington,  D.C.:  Economic  Development  Institute  of the World  Bank.