## American Geographical Society

Medjugorje: Finding Peace at the Heart of Conflict

Author(s): James M. Jurkovich and Wilbert M. Gesler

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 87, No. 4 (Oct., 1997), pp. 447-467

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215225 .

Accessed: 08/05/2014 21:35

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## The Geographical Review

VOLUME  87

October 1997

NUMBER  4

## MEDJUGORJE:  FINDING PEACE  AT THE HEART OF CONFLICT

## JAMES  M. JURKOVICH  and WILBERT  M. GESLER

ABSTRACT. Pilgrims  to the Bosnian  town of Medjugorje  find peace  at the heart of several conflicts  that  involve  ethnic,  religious,  and  political  tensions;  the  natural  and  the  supernatural;  rural  and urban  lifestyles;  the role of the Catholic  Church;  the sacred  and the profane; and the  Virgin  Mary's messages.  Peace  within  this  place  is  found  by  creating  community,  the Other,  ritual,  and myth. Keywords: Bosnia,  geography of religion, place.

[S]ystematic  healthy-mindedness, failing as it does  to accord  sorrow, pain, and death  any  positive  and active  attention  whatever, is  formally  less  complete than  systems  that  try  at least  to include  these  elements  in their  scope.

-William  James,  The  Varieties of  Religious Experience, 1902

Meaning  and  place  are  both  of the  essence of religion.

-Hans  Mol,  Meaning  and  Place,  1983

1n  i981,  several  children  in the remote  village  of Medjugorje-pronounced  MEHDjoo-gore-yeh-in  Bosnia  began  to report  visions of the  Virgin  Mary.  Since  then,  attracted  by these  apparitions,  approximately 25 million visitors  have  come to Medjugorje.  Analysis  of writings  by pilgrims,  clergy,  journalists,  and academics  reveals that  the  story  of  Medjugorje is  one  of  conflicts  or  opposites.  These  involve  ethnic,  religious, and political  tensions;  the natural  and the supernatural; rural-urban  contrasts;  contests  within the Catholic  Church; the sacred  and  the profane;  and  Mary's loving,  yet  apocalyptic,  messages  to the  visionaries. We  attempt  to give  coherence  to these conflicts by engaging  them in terms of the paradox  introduced  in our title: finding  peace  at  the  heart  of  conflict.  We  are  guided  in  this  endeavor by  the  argument that,  within  places,  religious beliefs  can  act  to  create order,  good,  and  meaning  out  of disorder,  evil,  and senselessness.

*$' MR. JURKOVICH teaches social studies at Saint Thomas Academy,  Saint Paul,  Minnesota 55120. DR.  GESLER is  a  professor  of geography  at  the University  of North Carolina,  Chapel  Hill,  North Carolina 27599-3220.

The Geographical Review  87 (4): 447-467, October 1997 Copyright a 1997  by the American  Geographical  Society of New York

FIG.  i-Saint  James  Church,  Medjugorje, in  August  1989.  (Photograph  by James  M. Jurkovich)

<!-- image -->

## THE  EVENTS AT MEDJUGORJE

On  Wednesday, 24 June 1981, the  Virgin  Mary  is  reported to  have  appeared to  a  group of children  from  Bijakovic'i, one of five  tiny  hamlets  in the  Medjugorje parish.  The first  visitation  was  witnessed  by  six  girls  and  boys,  who  ranged in  age  from  ten  to sixteen.  According  to their  account,  they  were  frightened  and ran  home. When  they went  to the  same  place  the  following  day, they  again  witnessed  a  visitation  of the  Virgin  Mary  (Laurentin and  Rupc'ic 1984).  The  next  day, a  group  of about  i,ooo villagers assembled  to observe  the entranced  children,  and  by  the fifth  day  as  many  as  15,000 people had gathered.

"I  have  come here  because  there  are  many  devout  believers  here.  I  have  come to tell  you  that  God  exists,  and He loves  you.  Let  others  who do not see me believe  as you do)" the  Virgin  Mary  responded,  according  to the  young  witnesses  or  "visionaries," when they  asked  her  why  she  had  come to  Medjugorje and  what  she  wanted  of the  people (Weible  1989,13). As  of  July 1998  the  Virgin  Mary  still  appeared to four  of the original  visionaries  (Medjugorje Web  1998). The oldest and most communicative  is  Vicka  Ivankovic', now thirty-three years  old  and  completely  devoted  to  receiving the pilgrims (Vukonic'  1992). The Virgin Mary  is reported  to appear  daily  at approximately  6:40 P.m.  local time (5:40  P.m.  in the winter)  in the  sacristy  of Saint James  Church  in the center  of Medjugorje  (Rodgers  and  Rodgers  1988) (Figure  1).

Although  there  are  no official  statistics,  the  Medjugorje parish  office  estimatesbased  partly  on the number  of communion hosts distributed-that, before  the re-

cent civil  war,  3,000 to 5,000 people  visited  Medjugorje each  day.  On religious  holidays,  such  as  the  anniversary of  the  first visitation,  io,ooo to 15,000 people  visited  the town. The office also reports  that parish  priests distributed  more than a million communion wafers  a  year  as  recently  as  1990  (Vukonic  1992). Although  the fighting in  Bosnia  sharply  reduced  the  number  of pilgrims,  several hundred  visitors  from  the Americas,  Europe,  and  as  far  away  as  the  Philippines  arrive every  day  (Sudetic  1993). With the cessation  of hostilities,  the number  of pilgrims  has  begun to rebound  to prewar  levels.  What  follows in this article  is an attempt  to explain  how the Medjugorje  phenomenon came to be.

## CREATING IDENTITY AND  ORDER  THROUGH RELIGIOUS BELIEF

William  James,  in the  epigraph,  argued  that  the "completest" religion  would  be one that  acknowledged evil  andthe  darker side  of  life  in  order  to  come  to  terms  with  them (1902) .  We  cannot  ignore  pain  and  suffering, he says;  rather, through  religion,  we  can confront  them and attempt  to restore  order  and meaning  to the world.  Hans Mol concurs  that  religion  helps  humans  to contain  calamities and  absorb  them  back  into an ordered  structure  (1983). Division and conflict  are  sad,  whereas  integration  and union are  bliss;  both,  Mol  contends,  are  necessary for  survival. In  other  words,  an  important  function  of religion  is  to reconcile  opposites-good  and  evil,  joy  and  sorrow, order  and disorder-and create  from  them a new,  meaningful  reality.

How does religion  create  order  and meaning  and help humans confront evil? One  way  is  to create  identity  for  both  individuals  and  groups.  Religion,  according  to Mol, reinforces  identity  in four  ways:  by creating  community  through  loyalty  and commitment; by distinguishing one's self and one's community from others; through  rituals; and  through  the  creation  of myths.  Community  is  often  established when people draw  together  in the  face  of danger  or  retreat from  a  world  they  do not fully  comprehend.  Religion  helps  people  to found  a  newworld  (Levine  1986). For  the believer, this  is  the  "real" world,  as  opposed  to the  disordered, profane  world  outside the circle  of belief.  Commitment  to the  group  and  faith  in its  beliefs  are  an  antidote to the alienation  that  many  experience,  especially  in industrialized societies.  Community formation,  however,  is often accomplished  by creating  the Other.  In religious terms, this means separating  out the sacred (us) from the profane (them) (Eliade 1959).  Ritual deals with dangers,  brings conflicts to the surface,  and recreates  wholeness;  it strengthens  group  cohesion  and  excludes  others;  it unifies  disparities  and opposites (Turner  1968;  Helman 1994). 'Rituals  of affliction," in particular,  are  performed  to solve  problems  and mend broken  relationships  between humans,  between  humans  and nature,  and between  humans  and the supernatural (Helman  1994).  Myths  perform  many  of the same  functions  as rituals;  that is,  they reconcile  contrasting  elements  and "dramatize the conflict  between  wholeness  and fragmentation  or identity  and  change"  (Mol  1983, 109). For  example,  they  create  an ageless  world  that  takes  the sting  out of death.

Place  may be an important  factor  in the creation  of identity  through  religion. Place  is an indicator  and source  of social  and political  order  (Agnew  and Duncan

1989).  It  can  provide  the  setting  for  a  stable  community  that  is  established  to counteract  rootlessness  and meaninglessness  (Mol 1983).  Reality  is negotiated  in place (Ley  1981). Place,  Anne Buttimer  notes, is especially  important  in times of change (1980). For  example,  the  reluctant  city  dweller  thinks  back  nostalgically to the idealized  rural  home place.  To  the religious  person,  of course,  place  may  become sacred space,  associated  with a  particular aspect  of nature  or  with  a  sacred  person  or  event (Sopher 1967). Mircea Eliade (1959) characterizes sacred space as hierophany, a particular  site  on the  earth's surface  where  the  sacred  reveals itself,  often  through  rocks, trees,  rivers,  mountains,  or other  objects  in the  natural  world.  Religion,  through  sacred  acts,  connects  people to place;  in turn,  places  connect  people to religion  (Mazumdar and Mazumdar 1993).

Religious  pilgrimages  to sacred  shrines have a very long tradition in Europe (Sumption  1975;  Nolan  and Nolan  1989) and other places around the world, especially  the Middle East  and Japan.  Wherever  the Catholic  Church  has been established, pilgrimages  to places  where the Virgin Mary  is believed  to have appeared have  become important  over  the last several  centuries,  never  more so than at the present  time (Zimdars-Swartz 1991).  Leaving  their home places,  pilgrims are detached  from  familiar  surroundings and  social  relationships; they  pass  through  a  period of liminality,  neither here nor there;  and then they establish  new bonds of communion  with  the  divine  and  with  their  fellows  at  the  pilgrimage site  (Turner  and Turner  1978).  Pilgrims  often overcome  hazards  and deprivations  to reach  a place where  they  believe  their  sins  will  be  forgiven, their  illnesses  cured,  and  their  misfortunes allayed.

## CONFLICTS SURROUNDING  MEDJUGORJE

## ETHNIC, RELIGIOUS, AND  POLITICAL TENSIONS

Eastern  Europe  is  well  known  as  a  shatterbelt; the southern  part  of Eastern  Europe, the Balkans,  provided  the eponymous  word  balkanization to the  vocabulary  of political  geography. In  other  words,  this  part  of the  world  has  achieved  a  reputation  for conflicts  stemming  from  political,  ethnic,  and religious  differences. The village  of Medjugorje is  in  the  former  republic  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina in  the  former  Yugoslavia.  The  people  of the  region  are  ethnically  and  religiously divided.  Croatians  are Catholic,  Serbians are  Orthodox,  and  Muslims  are  Slavic  people  converted  to Islam. These  cultural  identifications influence  the  character and  visitors' perceptions  of  the place (Rooney  1984).

The  first  great  religious  division  officially occurred  in  A.D.  1054 between  Western Catholic  Christianity, centered  in Rome,  and Eastern  Orthodox  Christianity, centered  in  Constantinople.  This  separation  pulled  Croatians  toward  Rome  and  Serbians toward  Constantinople.  Accounts  of forcible  conversions  in the region  to one faith  or  the  other  helped  to  sour  relations between  the  two  faiths.  In  addition  to  separating  the  southern  Slavs  into  two  competing  religions,  the  West-East split  separated the Serbo-Croatian  language  into a western Latin  script and an eastern  Cyrillic script (Singleton  1985).

Then, in the fifteenth  century,  Islam  began  to infiltrate  Bosnia  as the Ottoman Empire  expanded.  The  Turks  occupied  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  for  nearly  five  centuries,  fighting  intermittent  wars  against  the Austrians  and Hungarians.  The Austrian  Habsburg  dynasty  regarded  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  as the  protective  wall  to shield Christendom  from the infidel Islamic hordes. During the Islamization  of Bosnia  and  Herzegovina, many  people  in  the  region  were  converted. One  of the  least attractive features  of the  Ottoman  rule  was  the  compulsory  enrollment-bykidnapping,  in some cases-of  Christian  boys  in the military  and  administrative service  of the empire.  Not only were they pressed  into service,  they were forced  to become Muslims  and  to learn  Turkish-and theywere  not allowed  to marry  (Singleton  1985). By  the  seventeenth  century  the  number  of Muslims  was  larger than  the  total  number of Christians  (Malcolm  1994).

Almost  all  of  the  literature  on Medjugorje mentions  the  political  turmoil  and  the dramatic  and bloody confrontations  that have  permeated  the historical  development of the province.  Contributing  to the sense that  Christianity  in this region is special  and has  been protected  and nurtured  by God,  some promotional  literature uses  the  word  miraculous to describe  the  survival of Christian  religious  and  cultural life in spite  of Turkish  rule (Hill 1987).

By  the  nineteenth  century  the  Ottoman  grip  on Bosnia  and  Herzegovina had  begun to loosen, and the territory  came under  Austro-Hungarian rule  between 1878 and 1914.  As  a result  of World  War  I-triggered in the Bosnian  capital  of Sarajevonew states  were  created,  including  "the  Kingdom  of Serbs,  Croats,  and Slovenes," of which Bosnia  and  Herzegovina  was  a  part.  The  new  nation's  misnomer  title  was  resented by more than a dozen other major  ethnic groups  in the kingdom;  the state was  renamed  `Yugoslavia" (Land  ofthe South  Slavs)  in  1929. The  interwaryears were marred  by political  rivalry, based  largely  on ethnic,  separatist  ambitions.  The Serbian  king  declared  a royal  dictatorship  in 1929  in a  vain  attempt  to will the new nation together,  and  he  was  assassinated for  his  efforts  in  1934 by  Croatian  nationalists (Singleton  1985).

The modern state  of Yugoslavia was created  after  World  War  II.  After  the April 1941  Nazi invasion,  the "old" Yugoslavia  ceased  to exist.  The  Yugoslav  Communist forces  under  Josip  Broz  (nicknamed  Tito),  with  limited  Allied  assistance,  eventually prevailed  against  the  occupying  Nazis.  Tito's  Partisans also  prevailed, in  a  bitter  civil war,  against  Croatian  Ustage  fascists  and  Serbian  tetnik  monarchists.  The  Croatian Catholic Church  and Serbian  Orthodox  Church  aligned  with their respective  nationalist  forces  and  fought  for  independent  states.  Massacres of fascist  Croatians  and royalist  Serbs  and  persecutions  of priests  and  religious  devotees  were  widespread  as the Communists took revenge  and asserted  their power and authority  (Singleton 1985). Not all  Croatians or  Serbians were,  or  are,  die-hard  nationalists. Tito's  Partisan forces,  for  example,  were  made  up of a cross  section  of Yugoslavs. Tito himself  was half-Slovene  and half-Croat.

From  1945  to 1991  Yugoslavia was a mixture  of religious  and ethnic groups  that consisted  of six republics  and two semiautonomous  regions (Figure  2).  Unlike  the

FIG.  2-The  former  Yugoslavia.  (Cartography by  G.  R.  Dobbs,  Department  of  Geography, University  of North Carolina,  Chapel  Hill)

<!-- image -->

other  former  republics, which  are  relatively small  nation-states, the  former  Republic of Bosnia  and  Herzegovina was  a  patchwork  quilt  of Catholic  Croatians,  Orthodox Serbians,  and Muslims  of Slavic  descent  (Figure  3). Medjugorje is in the southern part  of the Bosnian  state,  in the  region  called  Herzegovina. After  World  War  II,  Tito treated  the  Muslims,  a  religious  and  cultural  group,  like  an  ethnic  group.  He  created the Republic  of Bosnia  and Herzegovina  in order  to enhance  the status  of Muslims and hence to balance  the various  ethnic groups  within Yugoslavia.

With the secession  of Slovenia  in June  1991, Yugoslavia  began to disintegrate. War broke out in Bosnia in 1992  and continued until an uneasy settlement was reached  in the November  1995  Dayton  Agreement.  Today  the Federal  Republic  of Yugoslavia  comprises  just Serbia  and Montenegro;  Slovenia,  Croatia,  Macedonia, and  Bosnia  are  independent  states.  Bosnia  is  by  far  the  most  tenuous,  divided  as  it is between  the Muslim-Croat  Federation  and the Bosnian  Serb  Republic  (Silber  and Little 1995).

In the recent  conflict Bosnia  and Herzegovina,  the least homogeneous of the Yugoslav  republics,  experienced  the most intense fighting  and most bitter  ethnic cleansing,  including  areas  very  near  Medjugorje. Claiming  that  theywere  fighting  to

ll'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

FIG.  3-Ethnic  areas  of Bosnia  and  Herzegovina.  Source:  Adapted  from  Silber  and Little  1995. (Cartography  by G. R.  Dobbs, Department  of Geography,  University  of North Carolina,  Chapel  Hill)

<!-- image -->

defend their families  and property,  Croatian  fighters  emptied numerous Muslim villages  near  Medjugorje and herded  thousands  of Muslim  men and  boys,  some as young as twelve,  into prison  camps (Sudetic  1993).  Nearby  Mostar,  once a popular day-trip  tourist  attraction  for  Medjugorje pilgrims,  became  divided  between  Croat and Muslim  populations  and military  forces,  and much of the city  was reduced  to rubble.

The civil  war  is  used  as  dramatic evidence  by  both devotees  and  critics  of the reported apparitions  to support their respective  understanding  of the meaning of Medjugorje. Those  who view the apparitions  as  a hoax  believe  that  Medjugorje has served to fan the flames of nationalism  and war,  to wipe out those who are not Catholic  and  Croatian  (Sudetic  1993). Those  who view the apparitions  as  authentic believe  that  the civil  war  is clear  evidence  of why  the  Virgin  Mary  came:  to say  that unless  humans  turn  to God  there  will  be no peace  between  God  and  humans  or  between humans. That Medjugorje  has been physically untouched by the war is pointed  to  by  devotees  as  further evidence  that  it  is  a  special  place  to  the  Virgin  Mary (Connell  1992).

Pilgrims  to Medjugorje have  made  a  virtue  out of the  long history  of conflict  in the surrounding  region.  The  struggle  to  keep  the faith  alive  despite  years  of oppression,  first  by  the  Muslim  Turks and  then  by  the  Communists,  has  provided  great  romantic  appeal  and  inspiration  (Hill  1987).  References to Medjugorje as  a "modernday  Bethlehem-simple, poor,  and  living  under  religious  and  social  oppression" are sprinkled  throughout  the  testimonial  literature  (MN,  August 1988).  The  appearance of the Virgin  Mary  in a troubled  land  during  a troubled  time marks  this  place  as a Ccnew Holy Land"  (MN, February  1984).  The recent  film Gospa  focuses  on the personal  struggle  of Jozo  Zovko,  a  parish  priest.  The  struggle  of the  priests  and  the  failure of the children  to crack  under  harassment  by local Communist officials  have impressed  Medjugorje followers, who see  the  defense  of faith  at  the  price  of  personal interests  and  sometimes  freedom  as  a  sign  of the  authenticity of the  apparitions  and a sign of hope for  the Communist  countries  (Laurentin  and Rup&amp;ic 1984).

Church-state tension  is  also  very  much  a  part  of the  Medjugorje experience.  Until  the  recent  breakup  of Yugoslavia, the state  policy  was  dominated  by  Marxist  philosophy.  Religion  was  marginalized immediately  after  the  World  War  II  for  political and  ideological  reasons,  and  religious  themes  became  taboo (Vukonic  1992). Therefore,  the Communist  government  found it difficult  to tolerate  public  devotion  to a visitation  of the  Virgin  Mary  on the territory  of socialist  Yugoslavia.

Ironically, once the tide  of  pilgrims  became  too large  to hold back  and  the  value of  hard  currency coming  into  the  country  too  high  to  resist,  the  Communist  government promoted the Medjugorje  phenomenon as a tourist enterprise  in order to benefit  financially. It worked  at a furious  pace  to add new hotels,  cottages,  restaurants,  and other necessities  to accommodate  the ever-growing  throngs (Vukoni6 1992).  Medjugorje became  an  unexpected  economic  boom,  the  most  popular  tourist attraction  in  Yugoslavia (Weible  1989).  This  unusual  turn  of events-a  Marxist  government  encouraging  Christian  pilgrims  to come to a Marian  shrine  in the  heart  of

its territory-did not escape  the notice of Medjugorje  devotees,  who attribute  the seemingly  impossible  to the Virgin  Mary  (Connell  1992).

The site and situation  of Medjugorje at the boundary  of Communist  East  and Democratic  West  and  at  also  the  boundary  of  three  religious  and  ethnic  groups  gives the experience  of some pilgrims an ecumenical  focus. In Medjugorje,  capitalists, Communists, Muslims, Orthodox Christians, Protestants,  and people of other faiths  are  purported  to pray  together  with  Catholics  "to  the  same  Holy  Mother." For example,  one of the strongest  promoters  of Medjugorje in the United  States  is  a Lutheran  (MN,  January1984). Many  pilgrims  interpret this  as  part  of  the  divine  plan:  a "planting  of the apparitions  in a field  of multidenominational  and religious  communities to bear  ecumenical  fruits"  (Pervan  1987, 67).

Medjugorje is  a  Croatian and  thus  Catholic  village.  However, before  the  civil  war, a small  number  of Muslims  and Serbians  from nearby  villages  and other  Yugoslav republics  would  come  to  worship  because  of the  extraordinary events  reported  to  be taking  place.  It  is  difficult  to assess  how  many  Muslims  and  Serbians actually  came  to Medjugorje-no numbers  are  available, and it is  possible  that  some of the  pilgrims' testimonials overstate  the ecumenical nature.  Moreover,  tensions between Medjugorje's Catholics  and  neighboring  Muslims  and  Serbs  did  not disappear  overnight with the advent  of the "Medjugorje Miracle."

Nonetheless,  the  perception  of Medjugorje as  an  ecumenical  center  is  important to  visitors.  The  presence  of  people  of different  cultural  and  religious  background inspires  a  sense  of reverence that  in  Medjugorje the  Mother  of God  is  speaking  directly to all her children (Rupcic 1987).  The Virgin Mary,  herself,  has reportedly  commented  on the divisions  through  the  visionaries,  saying  that  in God  there  are  no divisions and no  religions. She chastised residents for not associating with their neighboring  villages,  admonishing  them that  one is not a Christian  if one does not respect  Muslims  and Serbians  (Rooney  1984).  Sadly, however,  the spirit  of ecumenism that  pervades  Medjugorje did not stop  the onset  of new  atrocities  in  Yugoslavia through  the l990s.

It  is clear  that  Medjugorje and the surrounding  region  are  weighted  down with ethnic and religious  conflict.  And  yet pilgrims  have  made  a great  effort  to come to terms  with  the  evils  that  have  been  perpetrated by  intolerance  and  even  to  turn  them to good. Some  have  provided  sanctuary or  financial assistance  to  refugees. For  them, the hopeful appearance  of Mary  arises  out of the ashes  of war.  Also,  the Catholic faith has survived,  and God has even softened the hearts  of Communists,  as evidenced by the collapse  of Communist  governments  in Europe.  Furthermore, that Medjugorje  itself  has  been spared  physical  damage  is evidence  of the  Virgin  Mary's intervention  and protection.

## THE  NATURAL AND  THE  SUPERNATURAL

Medjugorje  (Between  the Mountains)  lies between  Mount Krizevac  (Mount of the Cross)  and  the  village  of Bijakovici, which is at  the foot of Podbrdo  (Hill  of Apparitions),  where  the  Virgin  Marywas first  seen.  The  stony, rugged  land  displays the  classic

erosional  features of  a  karst  landscape. Life  in  these  karsticpolje (fields)  is  an  unremitting  struggle  against  a  difficult  environment  of poor soils  and  marginal  rainfall  (Singleton 1985; Vukonic  1992).  Despite  this,  pilgrims  find  the landscape  appealing.

Medjugorje's physical  surroundings  are an integral  part of the experiences  of visitors.  Many  wake  up  early  to  see  the  sunrise  and  climb  Mount  Krizevac, saying  the

FIG.  4-Pilgrims  climb Mount Krilevac in June  1990. (Photograph  by James M.  Jurkovich)

<!-- image -->

rosary  at  the Stations  of the Cross  along  the  way  (Weible  1989)  (Figure  4). One reason they  do so is  to  be  near  the  Virgin  Mary, who is  said  to  pray  to her  Son  Jesus  every morning at the foot of the  giant  cement  cross  that  dominates  the summit  of Mount Krizevac  (Connell  1992).  Another  reason  is the  beautiful  view of the  villages,  fields, and  church  from  atop  the  mountain  (Figure 5).  Some  pilgrims  climb  barefoot  up  the

rocky  slopes  as  a  form  of penance.  Podbrdo  is  another  important  location  as  the  site of the first  apparitions,  even  though heavy  police pressure  quickly  forced  the children  and  observing  pilgrims  inside  the  church,  which  was  a  less  public  and  therefore more  palatable  locale  for  the  Communist  authorities. And now,  because  of the  large numbers  of pilgrims,  confessions  are  heard  outside  the church,  in the sunlight  and

FIG.  5-View  of  Medjugorje from  Mount  Krilevac.  (Photograph by the Office  of Yugoslav  Tourism)

<!-- image -->

open air-a  unique twist  to the sacrament  of reconciliation  that  is often associated with closed,  dark  confessional  booths.

Pilgrims to Medjugorje  also seek to experience  the supernatural: In fact, the natural  is often transformed  into the supernatural. One natural  phenomenon that plays  a role  in making  Medjugorje sacred  to believers  is  light.  Barbara  Weightman

finds that "[1] ight is fundamental  to religious  experience,  and its symbolism  pervades  the geography  of sacred  landscapes" (1996,  59).  As  examples,  light and darkness  are  evoked  to separate the  sacred  and  the  profane,  and  pilgrims  are  often  said  to journey  from  darkness to light.  In  addition,  Marian  apparitions  are  often  accompanied by visions of light (Zimdars-Swartz 1991).  In Medjugorje, "sun  miracles" are perhaps  the most often reported  supernatural occurrence: At unpredictable  times, pilgrims  are  able  to gaze  at  the sun.  Exact  descriptions  vary,  but generally the sun is directly  observable  and  may  move,  spin,  and/or  shoot out colors  of light.  Some  report that an image  of Mary  or Jesus  is visible in the sun.

Light  in other  unusual  forms  is  also  commonly  reported  at  Medjugorje: the cross atop Krizevac  glowing  like neon, streaks  of light and mist enveloping  the cross  at Krizevac or  the  shrine  at  Podbrdo, light  beams  from  the  sky  shining  on the  visionaries' heads,  hearts, or  Bibles,  and  rainbows  appearing when it is not raining  (Rooney  1984; Connell  1992).  Many  people  have  reported  seeing  the  horizontal bar  on the cross  on Mount Krizevac  disappear, leaving  only the vertical  bar,  which  turns  white (Weible 1989). On  the  same  evening  that  Mary said  to  the  visionaries, "I  am  the  Queen  of  Peace," manypeople  saw  clouds  form  the  wordMIR  (peace, in  Croatian) in  the  sky  (Hill  1987).

Myths  and  stories,  which  add  symbolism  and  meaning,  play  an  important  role  in Medjugorje.  Since the apparitions  began, the inexplicable  has become explicable and endowed  with a sense  of divine  intervention.  For  instance,  the 1974 painting  by native  artist  Vlado  Falek,  which hangs  from  the balcony  at the back  of Saint  James Church  and which depicts the Virgin  Mary  in a white dress  floating  above  Medjugorje  with arms  outstretched, is  now  believed  to  be  a  prediction  of the  current  apparitions  (Rodgers  and  Rodgers  1988; Vukoni6  1992).  Another  example  involves  the Virgin Mary's  reputation  as "Our  Lady,  Queen of Peace." An old Italian  statue  of Mary  in Saint  James Church  was  repainted in  1986. When  the  layers  of old  paint  were removed,  the original  inscription  on the statue  was revealed: "mir,  mir,  mir,'  just visible  in gold paint  above  Mary's heart (Rodgers  and Rodgers  1988).

There  is also a contrast  between  the previously  ordinary visionary  children  and their  extraordinaryexperiences. Theywere  considered to  be  typical,  unremarkable village  children when  Mary  first  appeared to  them  in  1981 (Pervan 1987); now  they  are  celebrities and  authorities on the  will  of  God.  By  virtue  of  their  ecstatic  experiences, they have  acquired charismatic power  and  attract crowds  hungry  for  mirades  and  messages from  heaven  (Woodward 1991). Although  the  visionaries are  young,  speak  softly,  and downplay  their  personal  significance, Medjugorje observers are  fascinated with  them and devote  large  portions  of their  writings  and  photographs to covering  their  every word  and  activity  (Hill  1987; Girard, Girard, and  Bubalo  1988; Connell  1992). It  seems that  because  the  ordinary visionaries have  access  to the  extraordinary-daily contact with Mary-they provide  pilgrims  with a bridge  to God (Connell  1992).

## RURAL/TRADITIONAL WAYS  VERSUS URBAN/MODERN  WAYS

Before  1981 and during  the first  few  years  of the  apparitions,  Medjugorje  had a bucolic  atmosphere, with almost  no traffic along  unpaved  roads,  no  bars,  cafes,  or  inns,

merely  small peasant  homes in which three-generation  families  resided.  Farming was  the main  occupation,  a  lifestyle  most  people  in  the  West  remember  only  nostalgically  from  their  childhood  or  from  stories  and  movies.  Ironically, the  very  success of Medjugorje  has transformed  it into an urban  place.  The  local population  nearly doubled  during the 198os, increasing from around 300 households  in 1981  to more than  500 by  late  1989. The  village  infrastructure has  struggled  to meet  the  constantly growing  needs  of the inhabitants  and  visitors.  The  late  appearance of an  urban  plan has  resulted  in gross  spatial  disorder  in the  village.  In  general,  everything  seems  improvised,  even  the  large  and  unfinished  houses,  which  have  been  built  haphazardly, with little sign of planning.  Because  of their  location,  some of these  new buildings have  blighted  the  landscape  and  obstructed  the  view of Mount  Kriaevac. Thus,  in a tangible  way,  the material  success  of  Medjugorje is  beginning  to block  what  made  it successful:  a clear  view of religious  symbols.

Tourism  has  replaced farming  as  the  primary  source  of income.  According to  the Italian  press,  the  value  of Medjugorje to Italian  tour  operators  exceeded  u.s.sio billion by  1989  (Vukonic  1992). The  physical  manifestations  of change  are  visible  in  the tourist  shops,  bar-cafes, pizzerias,  and  tourist  offices  that  give  this  once-sleepy  farm village  a beach-town air.  Such  commercialism  is common in religious  pilgrimage places:  Similar  tourist  and  commercial  transformations have  taken  place  in  Lourdes, in Jerusalem,  in Knock,  Ireland,  and at other  sites (Gesler  1996).

Despite  the obvious urbanization  of Medjugorje and the importation  of Western  lifestyles, many  pilgrims  still  come  to  the  place  for  a  sense  of  what  once  was.  They seem  to  be  able  to see  through  a  modernized  landscape  to  the  simpler, traditional  life of the  past.  They  can  even  take  a  moral  lesson  from  the  contrast: they  live  in  a  materialistic  world yet invoke resistance  to that world. They carry  this idea home with them:

The  Virgin  Mary  has  messages for  the  western world,  too.  We [the  Western world]  seem  to think  we're better  than  the  rest  of the  world. She  talks  about  too much  drugs  and  far  too  much  television, which  takes up  so  much  of our  time.  We waste  an  awful lot  of time  that  could  be  spent  on  better things....  [W] e have  advanced far  ahead of  the  rest of  the  world in  technology and  we  seem to  think we  have done  it  on  our  own,  that  is  without the  help  of God.  (MN,  January 1986, 5)

The fact  that  Medjugorje is  a  model  Christian  community  is often  mentioned  as one of the most powerful  elements,  or  even  miracles,  of the  place.  The  Virgin  Mary, according  to the visionaries,  chose Medjugorje as a place  to appear  because  "there are  many  believers  here." The  perceived  appearance of the  Virgin  Mary  has  inspired some locals  to put her  messages  into  practice,  through  dutiful  prayer, regular  attendance  at mass,  sunrise  rosary  services,  and  down-home hospitality  that  further  inspires the visitors. Overall,  many of the pilgrims  believe that the real miracle of Medjugorje  is  their  exposure  to  away  of  life  they  thought  no  longer  existed  or  was  no longer  possible:  community oriented,  nonmaterialistic,  rural,  devout.

## THE ROLE OF THE CHURCH

Although  the  Vatican  has  not officially  sanctioned  the  apparitions  in  Medjugorje as authentic,  the Catholic  Church  strongly  influences  the actions  of visitors  and residents.  For  one thing,  several  intrachurch conflicts  surround  the  events  in the town. Franciscan  priests  came  to the region  of Herzegovina  in the fourteenth  century  as missionaries  (Rodgers  and  Rodgers  1988).  Ever  since  nearby  Mostar  became  a diocese one hundred  years  ago, various conflicts have arisen  between the bishop in charge  of the diocese and the more independent-minded  Franciscans  (Laurentin and  Rup6ic  1984). Only  a  short  time  before  the  apparitions began,  the  bishop  of Mostar  began  to  assert  more  authority  over  the  area,  including  replacement of the  Franciscans with diocesan priests.  The Franciscans  resented  the bishop's  actions and resisted  moving  from  their  long-held  parishes.  The  bishop  has  asserted  that  the  visions at  Medjugorje are  a  hoax  through  which  the  Franciscans are  attempting  to retain regional  control  (Hill 1987).  The contest  for  ecclesiastical territory  is evident.

Another  source  of tension  within  the  Catholic  Church  is  the  conflict  between  its institutional,  conservative side  and  its  charismatic elements,  between  those  who are more cautious  about  anything  supernatural and those who are  more  willing to accept  supernatural phenomena.  Church  authorities, especially  since  the  Vatican II  reforms of the 196os,  tend to be conservative  in this regard  (Laurentin  1994).  At the same  time,  the  laity  demand  a  more  mystical  element  in religious life.  In  recent  years an ideology that incorporates  the messages of various Marian apparitions has grown up around the edges of mainline Roman Catholic institutions (ZimdarsSwartz  1991).

Mary  as a messenger  of God's  Word  is a contrast  to both the exclusively  male authority  of  the  church  and  the  Christian image  of a  male  God.  Several scholars  have proposed that one of the primary  reasons  for the dynamic  growth  of the Marian phenomenon lies in the  symbolic  power  of her  figure,  which  bears  images  of the  divine  that  otherwise  are  excluded  from  the  traditional  Christian perception  of God  as Father, Son,  and  Spirit. In  other  words,  female  images  of God  are  arguably necessary for  the  full  expression  of the  mystery  of God  but  are  suppressed from  official  formulations;  as  a  result,  many  people  have  been  attracted to  the  figure  of the  woman  Mary (Greeley  1977; Johnson  1989; Young  1994).

The  hierarchy  of the  Catholic  Church  is  such  that  the  authorities  lead  and  teach laypersons.  Medjugorje has  caused  this  hierarchy to  be  turned  upside  down  and  has thereby  created  a conflict in social space.  The institution of the church  is led by adult,  male  clergy, yet  the  visionaries  are  young,  predominantly  female,  and  laypersons-  those  who traditionally  have  little  voice  in the  church.  In  the  setting  of Medjugorje,  those  with  little  voice  in  the  hierarchy are  now relied  on  by  those  with  great authority  for  the  Word  of God.  Even  the  pope,  John  Paul  II,  acknowledged this  turn of events to a group of priests  about to visit Medjugorje: "[L]  et the people go  to Medjugorje. They  are  going  to  pray. When  you get  there  pray  for  me.  Sometimes  the people follow  the bishops,  sometimes the  bishops  follow  the  people"  (Eck  and  Eck 1994,  15).

Despite the influence of the visionaries,  the church  retains  some of its traditional control by organizing  activities  around  the apparitions  and by interpreting the messages  in light of church  doctrine  and understanding  of the Gospel (Miravalle  1986).  Leading  Marianologists  caution  that  the  young,  untrained  lay  visionaries are  not infallible  and  may  incorrectly  interpret  the Virgin  Mary's warnings  too literally  (Zimdars-Swartz 1991).  And, although  the nature  of the messages-direct communications from Mary-is  extraordinary,  the content of the messages is known and  familiar  to the church.  Daily  messages  include  topics  such  as  conversion and faith:

Dear  Children! Do not  wait....  I  am  asking for  conversion. Be  prepared for  anything  and  be converted. Renounce  everything which  is a barrier to conversion. (26 April  1983; Girard,  Girard,  and Bubalo  1988,  14)

## and daily  prayer:

Today, Iwould  like  to tell  you  to  pray before your  work  and  to end  your  work with  prayer. If  you  do so,  God  will  bless  you  and  your  work.  These  days, you  are praying too little  and  working too much.  Pray more.  In  prayer you  will  find  rest. (5 July  1984;  Girard,  Girard,  and Bubalo  1988,  116)

The messages are based on the Gospel and on traditional  Catholic teachings of prayer, fasting,  and  confession  as  a  means  of  accepting God  and  finding  inner  peace.

It appears,  then, that, although  the Catholic  Church  maintains  control of the situation  in  Medjugorje, pilgrims  resist  the  form  and  fact  of control  in  various  ways. The  local  Franciscans contest  the  secular  power  of  the  bishop  of Mostar.  Supernatural interpretations  of events counter the normally conservative  reactions of the church  to  phenomena  such  as  Marian  apparitions. Pilgrims  identifywith  female  images  of God,  in contrast  to the  typical  male  personifications of deity.  And  the  activities of the lay  visionaries  and  pilgrims  upset  the normal  church  hierarchy.

## THE SACRED AND THE PROFANE

The sacred  and  symbolic  landscape  of Medjugorje contains  three  focal  points.  Saint James  Church  is sacred  because  it is a  consecrated church  and  because  of the  events that daily  transpire  there;  people also go there  to pray  and to worship.  Pilgrims  to Medjugorje are  encouraged  to  attend  mass  daily, and  many  go more  than  once  a  day. Podbrdo  is the site of the first  series  of apparitions.  Ever  since the fifth  day,  when 15,000  people  witnessed  the  six  children  in  "ecstasy"-that  is,  on  their  knees  praying, singing,  and  talking  with the unseen  Virgin  Mary-Podbrdo has  been a sacred  site. Mount Krizevac,  with its huge cement cross,  is the most popular  outdoor spot at Medjugorje.  The popularity  stems  from  its  breathtaking view of the area;  from  the phenomena  involving  light,  clouds,  and  sun;  and  from  the  belief  that  Mary  prays  at the foot of the cross.

If  some  places  on  the  earth's surface  are  held  to  be  sacred, other  spots,  in  contrast, are  thought to be profane  (Eliade  1959).  Commercial  capitalism  has created  many

FIG.  6-A  tourist souvenir  shop in Medjugorje,  June 9ggo.  (Photograph  by James  M. Jurkovich)

<!-- image -->

profane  spaces  in Medjugorje. Once pilgrims,  tourists,  and curiosity  seekers  began to pour  into  the  tiny  village,  shopkeepers set  up  their  wares  as  close  as  possible  to the edge of the church  grounds  to take  advantage  of the ongoing  events.  Religious  articles,  many  of them unofficial  and fabricated  of cheap  plastic,  are  available  in great quantity,  and include rosary  beads,  statues  of Mary  and Jesus,  medals  and medallions,  and  such  tourist  fare  as  T-shirts,  travel bags,  and  postcards  (Figure  6). This  attempt to capitalize  on and thus trivialize  the apparitions  has created  tension with local  church  officials,  who view the  shopkeepers as  competing  monetarily  and  spiritually  with the church.

Commercial  interests  have  also  attempted  to capitalize  on ethnic tensions.  Today,  the warring  ethnic groups have reclaimed  their titles. Croatian  Ustase were fierce  nationalists  who allied  with  the  German  Nazis  during  World  War  II  in a  bid  to create  a  Croatia  independent  of Serbia.  Some shops (not sanctioned  by  the church) just across  the street  from Saint  James  Church  sell rosaries  and Madonna  statues alongside  badges  and  pins  with  the  Ustage  symbol,  as  well  as  Nazi  swastikas and  Iron Crosses.  Nationalism  has  aligned  itself  with the  fervor  of Medjugorje, attempting  to utilize  the appearance  of the  Virgin  Mary  on "Croatian" soil-a  Croatian  village  in Herzegovina-as a sign  or  blessing  to Croatian  nationalists  about  the righteousness of their cause (Sudetic  1993).

Along  with shops  have  come new  cafes,  bars,  and  pizza  parlors  with bright  signs such as "Cafe  New York" lining the road  directly  in front of Saint  James  Church.

Some people think that Medjugorje  now has the look and feel of a beach resort (Sudetic  1990). The proliferation  of tourist  traps  selling  popular  products  and services  has  created  what  Edward Relph  called  "placelessness," making  Medjugorje into a place  that could be anywhere  and that leaves  the observer  feeling  empty (Relph 1976).  The  cafes  that  serve  Western food and  drink  and  the  shops  that  sell  kitsch  embody "inauthentic" attitudes-they are  cheap  imitations  that capitalize  on the appeal  of the  adjacent sacred  areas. Keep  in  mind,  however, that  placelessness is  a  point of view.  A devout  pilgrim-an  insider-may be able  to tolerate  or  may  not even  see the placeless  element,  whereas  a skeptical  tourist-an  outsider-will  see the placelessness  as an integral  element in the character of the place.

Even  the  most  faithful,  seeking  out  sacred places,  cannot  avoid  the  profane.  Most visitors  are  continually  involved  in both domains.  However, profane  space  in Medjugorje  may  serve  to  heighten  the  significance of the  sacred  for  pilgrims.  True  believers are able to  ignore the profane or at least push it into the background and concentrate  on the  blessings  they  receive  from  the  sacred. The profane  may  serve  as an Other  to heighten  the significance  of one's  own identity  and sacred  space.

## THE MESSAGES FROM MARY

There  are  two  levels  to  the  messages of  the  Virgin  Mary: a  personal  level,  on  which  she is a tender,  maternal  figure,  reaching  out to the individual;  and a public level, on which she is a social  reformer  who requires  sacrifice  in order  to find  peace.  That  is, Mary's  messages  contain  both soft and  hard  aspects.  They  are  soft in the sense  that she  proclaims  herself  to be  the  Queen  of Peace  and  reassures all  who dedicate  themselves  to God  that  they  will have  inner  peace  and  a  place  in the  kingdom  of heaven. For  example:

Dear  Children! I  have told  you  already that  I  have chosen  you  in  a  special way, the  way  you  are. I,  the  Mother, love  you  all.  And  in  any  moment when  it  is  difficult for  you,  don't be  afraid. Ilove  you  even when  you  are  far  away from  me  and  my  Son. (24  May  1984;  Hill 1987,  14)

The messages  are hard in the sense that Mary demands sacrifice  and discipline. Specific  instructions  have  included  saying  at  least  one full  rosary  every  day  (fifteen decades  of prayers),  attending  mass  at  least  once a week,  going to confession  every month,  and  fasting  on  bread  and  water  every  Wednesday and  Friday  (Miravalle 1986).

Medjugorje  has  developed  a  reputation  as  a  place  of peace,  but  if  visionaries  and devotees  of the  apparitions  have  any  one common trait,  other  than  their  perception of the Virgin's  intervention  in human affairs,  it is an acute  awareness  of suffering (Zimdars-Swartz 1991).  Heaven  is  part  of Mary's messages,  but  so too are  purgatory and  hell,  two  concepts  the  Catholic  Church has  de-emphasized  in recent  years  (Wilhelm  1981;  Miravalle 1986). For example:

Dear  Children! Pray because Satan is  constantly trying to  thwart my  plans.  Pray with the heart  and  offer  yourselves to Jesus  in prayer. (11  August  1984; Girard, Girard,  and Bubalo  1988,149)

In addition to the regular  public messages  about accepting  God and finding peace,  each  of the  six  visionaries  is  to eventually receive  ten  secrets,  several  of which are  believed  to  be  apocalyptic  (Zimdars-Swartz 1991). One of the  apocalyptic  secrets seems to concern the timing and nature of the Virgin Mary's  final sign at Medjugorje,  after which  she  will  no longer  appear  on earth  and  mankind  will  be  given  its last  chance  for conversion  (Girard,  Girard, and Bubalo  1988).  According  to the visionaries,  many  healings  and  miracles will  follow  the  final  sign,  but  for  those  who  believe,  the  time  that  precedes the  sign  is  to be  used  not merely  waiting  but  developing a deeper  conversion  and faith.

The Medjugorje pilgrims  are  presented  with both the  harsh  and  the soft  aspects of Mary's  words.  Most of them are  comforted  by a promise  of motherly  care  and peace.  They are  divided,  however,  in their  response  to her darker  messages.  Some choose  to either  deny  or  ignore  them.  Others  respond  positively  to  the  more  difficult messages,  which suggests  that they are  willing to face the hard truth. This latter group of pilgrims  does not appear  to mind a stern  message  delivered  tenderly.  In other words, they are able to reconcile  seeming opposites;  they know that life is difficult  and  are  willing  to make  sacrifices to achieve  peacefill  ends.

## RELIGION, IDENTITY, AND  CONFLICT RESOLUTION

At  the beginning  of this  article  we posited  that  one of the functions  of religion  is  to enable  adherents to  confront  evil  and  to  restore order  and  meaning  to  their  lives.  One way it does this is  by  creating  or re-creating  identity  through  establishing  community,  distinguishing Others,  performing  rituals, and  creating myths.  Victor  and  Edith Turner  contend  that  pilgrims  who visit  sites  such  as  Lourdes  and Jerusalem experience a sense of communitas,  a bond of friendship  with fellow  believers  (1978).  Although  this  idea  has  been  contested  by  some  scholars, such  as  John  Eade  (1992),  who finds  that  there  are  numerous  factions  and tensions  at Lourdes,  many  pilgrims  do genuinely  experience  a strong  feeling  of brotherhood  (Gesler  1996).

Medjugorje  pilgrims  create  community  by  remembering  how Christianity  survived in the area  despite  the Moslem  Turks  and the presumably  godless  Communists.  At  the  same  time,  they  see  the  town  as  a  place  where  people  from  many  ethnic and  religious  groups  come  together  to  worship  and  seek  peace.  Community  is  found in a  nostalgic  view  of the  town  of Medjugorje as  the  rural  idyll  and  model  Christian community  it no longer  is.  They  seem  to be able  to see  through  the modern  town  to the  vision of the  type  of community  theywant  for  themselves. The creation  of social spaces  in Medjugorje creates  community.  Pilgrims  see  themselves  as  being  in touch with the divine, in communion with both God and each other as they enter  holy ground.  Mary's messages  produce  community  feeling  because  she  promises  believers  a  place  among  the  elected  in  heaven  if  theywill  repent  and  come  to  a  deeper  commitment to faith.

Although  the pilgrims,  as  well as the reported  messages  from  Mary,  stress  ecumenism, community  creation  is accompanied  by the simultaneous  creation  of the Other.  This  is  evidenced  in  Medjugorje in many  ways.  In  the  past,  Moslem  Turks  op-

posed Christianity; in more  recent  times  the  Communists  were  made  the  evil  outsiders  who opposed  God's wishes.  Urbanization is  also  part  of  the  Other,  especiallywhen commercialism  and placelessness degrade  the sacred  and  when buildings  block  the view of sacred  symbols.  Within the Catholic  Church  itself,  secular  authority  is set against  the Franciscans, and conservative leaders  are  made  the Other  by  charismatic pilgrims.  Resisting  the Other-as when the Franciscans resisted  diocesan  authority, when Mary is set in opposition to male authority,  or when pilgrims  gathered  in defiance  of  the  Communist  authorities-enhances  the  development  of  community.

Serious pilgrims who come to Medjugorje  engage in a series of rituals that strengthen  their  spiritual  commitment.  They follow daily  routines,  which include attending  masses, saying  the rosary,  confession, fasting,  and visiting sacred  sites. Some  go so far  as  to climb  over  the  sharp  rocks  of  Mount  Krizevac on their  knees  and with  their  feet  bare.  Enacting  rituals  within  a  group  helps  to  foster  community  spirit. By performing  familiar,  standardized activities,  such  as  visiting  the Stations  of the Cross  or  praying  to Mary, pilgrims  are  able  to deal  with  uncertainty and  lessen  anxiety.  As  they  pray  to God  to heal  the  wounds  of war  and  ethnic  discord,  they  perceive that  peace  is a real  possibility.

Finally,  pilgrims  have created  myths about Medjugorje  that develop meaning and identity.  Some of these myths involve  the mystical  transformation  of natural objects;  others  involve  unusual  events;  still  others  foretell  the future.  These  myths, we argue,  are  a  way  of saying  that  the  seemingly  impossible  is  possible.  Humans,  the pilgrims believe, can be in touch with, can witness, the supernatural,  the divine. They  can  look forward  to a life  when they  are  in the presence  of Mary.  Peace  can  be uncovered  and brought  back  into the world.

To  conclude  this  discussion,  we  reiterate once  more  the  idea  that  some  people  are able to transform  evil to good in a particular  place.  That  is, Medjugorje  performs several  of the important  functions that geographers  attribute  to places.  It clearly provides  focus  and  meaning.  It  is  often  spoken  about  by  pilgrims  who  visit  other  sacred  places,  such  as  Lourdes.  Pilgrims  travel  to  Medjugorje despite  many  hardships and dangers.  They  take  pictures  of strange  phenomena  there  and  trade  the photographs  with each  other.  The town has achieved  a  worldwide  reputation  as  a sacred site. In a rapidly  changing  world,  believers  discover  a haven  where  they can, for a brief  time, come into contact  with a group  of like-minded  people and find  peace.

## CONCLUSION

We  began  this  article  with  a  paradox: Hundreds  of thousands  of pilgrims  to the  town of Medjugorje,  located  in the heart  of the war-torn  former  Yugoslavia,  come away with  a  feeling  of  peace.  Highlighting  Medjugorje at  the  center  of  a  variety  of  political, economic,  social,  and  cultural  conflicts,  our  argument has  been  that  many  visitors  to the town are  able  to resolve  these  conflicts  or reconcile  seeming  opposites  through religious  belief.  More  specifically, religion  creates for  them  personal  and  group  identity  through  commitment  to a  community  of believers, by  creating  contrasting  Others,  through  ritual,  and through  mythmaking.

We  recognize  that  many  religious  people  may  use  religion  to  justify  or  rationalize evil acts;  the same  Croats,  Serbs,  Muslims,  and others  who worship  at Medjugorje one day  may  be  willing  to condone  the  murder  of Others  the  next.  Religion  has  been known to bring out both the best and the worst in people. However,  Medjugorje moves at least some pilgrims to love their neighbors. We concur with William James's idea  that  a  religion  that  only  looks  at  the  brighter side  of life  and  ignores  evil or  tries  to  push  it  under  the  rug  is  not  as  complete  as  one  that  recognizes evil  and  tries to come to terms  with it.

## REFERENCES

- Agnew,  J.  A., and J.  S. Duncan.  1989. Introduction.  In The  Power  of Place:  Bringing  together  Geographical  and  Sociological Imaginations, edited  by  J.  A.  Agnew  and  J.  S.  Duncan,  1-8. Boston:  Unwin Hyman.
- Buttimer,  A.  1980.  Home, Reach,  and the Sense of Place.  In The  Human Experience of Space  and Place,  edited  by A. Buttimer  and D. Seamon,  166-187.  New York: St.  Martin's Press.
- Connell,  J.  T.  1992. The  Visions  ofthe Children:  TheApparitions oftheBlessedMotheratMedjugo re. New York:  St.  Martin's Press.
- Eade,J. 1992.  Pilgrimage  and  Tourism  at  Lourdes,  France.Annals of  Tourism Research 19(i):  18-32.
- Eck,  L.,  and M. S. Eck. 1994. The Priest  Who Built St.  James  Church.  Medjugorje Newsletter,  MayJune, 10, 14-15.
- Eliade,  M.  1959. The  Sacred  and the  Profane: The  Nature  of  Religion.  Translated by Willard  R.  Trask. New York:  Harcourt  Brace.
- Gesler,  W.  1996. Lourdes:  Healing  in a Place  of Pilgrimage.  Health  &amp;  Place  2 (2): 95-105.
- Girard,  G.,A.  Girard, and  J.  Bubalo. 1988. Mary,  Queen  ofPeace,  Stay  with Us:  Testimonies in  Favor of Medjugorie. Montreal:  Maison St.-Pascal.
- Greeley,  A. M.  1977. The  Mary  Myth:  On the  Femininity  of God.  New York: Seabury  Press.
- Helman,  C.  G.  1994. Culture, Health,  andIllness:An  IntroductionforHealth Professionals. 3d  ed.  Oxford and Boston:  Butterworth-Heinemann.
- Hill, J.,  ed.  1987. Medjugorie. Concord,  Mass.:  Center  for Peace.
- James,  W.  1902.  The  Varieties of Religious  Experience: A Study  in Human  Nature.  New York:  Longmans, Green.
- Johnson,  E.  A.  1989. Mary  and the Female  Face  of God. Theological Studies  50 (3):  500-526.
- Laurentin,  R.  1994. The  Importance  andAuthenticity  of Medjugorje: What  Is  Its  Impact  onthe U.S.? Medjugorie Newsletter, May-June,  11-13.
- Laurentin,  R.,  and L.  Rupdid. 1984. Is the  Virgin  Mary  Appearing at  Medjugorje? An Urgent  Message for the  World Given  in a  Marxist  Country. Translated by  Francis  Martin.  Washington,  D.C.:  Word Among Us Press.
- Levine,  G.  J. 1986. On the Geography  of Religion.  Transactions of  the  Institute  of  British  Geographers 64 (4): 506-513.
- Ley,  D.  1981.  Behavioral Geography  and  the  Philosophies  of Meaning.  In  Behavioral Problems in Geography  Revisited, edited  by K.  R.  Cox and R.  C.  Golledge,  209-230.  New York:  Methuen.
- Malcolm,  N.  1994. Bosnia:  A Short  History.  New York: New York  University  Press.
- Mazumdar,  S.,  and  S.  Mazumdar.  1993. Sacred  Space  and  Place  Attachment.  Journal  of  Environmental Psychology 13 (3): 231-242.
- Medjugorje  Web. 1998. [http://www.medjugorje.org].
- Miravalle,M.I. 1986.  TheMessageofMedjugore:.TheMarianMessagetotheModernWorld.Lanham, Md.:  University  Press  of America.
- MN [Medjugorje Newsletter]. 1984-1988. Myrtle  Beach,  S.C.:  Weible  Columns.
- Mol,  H.  1983. MeaningandPlace:An  Introduction to  the  Social  ScientificStudyofReligion. NewYork: Pilgrim  Press.
- Nolan, M.  L.,  and  S.  Nolan.  1989. Christian Pilgrimage  in  Modern  Western Europe.  Chapel  Hill:  University  of North Carolina  Press.
- Pervan,  T.  1987. Our Lady  Is  Guiding  the Community.  In  Medjugorje, edited  by J.  Hill,  19-23.  Concord,  Mass.:  Center  for Peace.

- Relph,  E.  1976. Place  and Placelessness. London:  Pion.
- Rodgers,  P.,  and  I.  Rodgers,  eds.  1988. MedjugorjeHandbook:A Pilgrim's Guide.  Middlesex,  England: Rodgers  Publishing.
- Rooney,  L. 1984. Mary,  Queen  of  Peace.  New York: Alba  House.
- Rup&amp;i6, L.  1987. What Medjugorje  Means to Us.  In Medjugorje, edited by J.  Hill, 6-1o. Concord, Mass.:  Center  for Peace.
- Silber,  L.,  and  A. Little. 1995. Yugoslavia: Death of a Nation. New York:  Penguin  Books.
- Singleton, F.  B.  1985.  A Short  History  of the Yugoslav Peoples.  Cambridge,  England,  and New York: Cambridge  University  Press.
- Sopher,  D. E.  1967. Geography of  Religion.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice  Hall.
- Sudetic,  C.  1990.  Do 4 Behold  the Virgin?  A Bishop  not a Believer. New York  Times,  28  September, ?A,  4.
1993. A Shrine  in Bosnia  Is  Now Illuminated  by  Rockets.  New York Times,  26 September,  ?A, 20.
- Sumption, J. 1975. Pilgrimage: An Image  of  Mediaeval  Religion.  London:  Faber  and Faber.
- Turner,  V.,  and  E.  Turner. 1978. Image  and  Pilgrimage  in Christian  Culture: Anthropological Perspectives.  Oxford:  Basil  Blackwell.
- Turner,V.W. 1968. TheDrums  ofAffliction:A Study  of  Religious Processes amongthe  Ndembu  ofZambia. Oxford:  Clarendon  Press;  London:  International  African  Institute.
- Vukoni6,  B.  1992. Medjugore's  Religion  and  Tourism  Connection.Annals  of  Tourism Research 19(i): 79-91.
- Weible,  W.  1989. Medjugorje: The  Message.  Orleans,  Mass.:  Paraclete  Press.
- Weightman,  B.  1996. Sacred  Landscapes and  the Phenomenon of Light.  Geographical Review  86(1): 59-71.
- Wilhelm,  A.  J. 1981. Christamong  Us:  A Modern  Presentation of  the  Catholic  Faith.  New York: Paulist Press.
- Woodward,  K.  1991. Going to See  the Virgin  Mary.  New York Times  Book  Review,  ii  August,  1.
- Young,  A.  1994.  Visions of the Virgin.  Common  Boundary  12 (12):  36-41.
- Zimdars-Swartz,  S. L. 1991. Encountering Mary: From La Salette to Medjugorje.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton  University  Press.