<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Bavarian Leavenworth and the Symbolic Economy of a Theme Town

Author(s): Stephen Frenkel and Judy Walton

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 90, No. 4 (Oct., 2000), pp. 559-584

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250784

Accessed: 20-01-2016 03:10 UTC

## REFERENCES

Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250784?seq=1&amp;cid=pdf-reference#references\_tab\_contents

You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

<!-- image -->

## BAVARIAN  LEAVENWORTH AND THE SYMBOLIC  ECONOMY  OF A THEME  TOWN

## STEPHEN  FRENKEL and  JUDY WALTON

ABSTRACT.  Theme towns are an often-overlooked  but  significant  form of tourism in rural areas.  Many  a small town across  the United States,  faced with a  declining  resource-based economy,  has  turned  to  "theming" as an  economic-development  strategy. In  hopes  of creating  an  alluring  landscape,  the built environment  is  radically  transformed,  and a  variety  of invented traditions are instituted. This article  explores  one  such  place-Leavenworth, Washington-that  "went  Bavarian" in the 196os  and is  widely  viewed as a success  story.  We examine four interrelated  concepts  that  produce  the  symbolic economy  of Leavenworth: emulation of other theme  towns,  authenticity, visual  difference,  and  place  marketing. After discussing  each,  we turn  to the  questions  of how residents  are  affected by  tourism  and  what  it is like  to live  in Leavenworth. Keywords: landscape, Leavenworth, theme  town,  tourism.

Who  or  what  are  we?  Are  we  going  to become  Bavarians? Are  we  going  to be imposters the rest  of  our  lives?  What  has become  of  Leavenworth? Is it still there  beneath  the facade?  Or  is the  facade  Leavenworth?

-Dirk Andersen,  1969

O  ne hundred  miles east  of Seattle,  on a  highway  running  through  the Cascades, travelers will find  a  small  town  that  bills  itself  as  a  "Bavarian Village." With its  nearly 4,000 residents,  Leavenworth, Washington,  is a  place  where  visitors  can  stroll,  shop, and  dine to the sound of accordions  and German  brass  bands  or  simply  take  in the scenery  of  "Washington's Alps"  (Figure  1).  Half-timbered  facades,  hanging  flower baskets,  painted  murals,  German  lettering,  lederhosen,  and  bratwurst  abound.  Behind  this  fun  image,  however, lies  the  fascinating story  of how a  declining,  resourcebased  community  metamorphosed  into a  thriving,  model theme  town.  It  illustrates a  peculiar  irony  of theme-town  development-that  what  begins  as an economic panacea  can  easily  become an obsession.  How does this  happen?  How are  tourist sites  like  Leavenworth created, maintained, and  reproduced? What  makes  them  work? And what are  the  implications  for their  residents?

The  post-World  War  II era  has  witnessed  the decline  of a number  of rural,  resource-based economies  and  an  increasing turn  to  tourism  as  an  alternative economy. For  the  small  town,  tourism  development  strategies often  mean  the  commodification of its  landscape,  turning  the  place  into  something  to be consumed. An extreme example  of this  is the ethnic  theme  town,  such  as  "Danish" Solvang  in California  or "Swiss" New Glarus  in Wisconsin.  Although  the theme is  usually  based on a resident  ethnic  population, in some  cases-such as  Leavenworth, Washington, and  Helen, Georgia  (also Bavarian)-it  is  completely  invented.  In this article  we  explore  the invented  theme town as a distinctive  tourist  landscape  and examine the material

*G DR. FRENKEL is an  adjunct professor  of  geography  at Humboldt  State  University, Arcata, California  95521,  where  DR. WALTON is an assistant  professor  of  geography.

The  Geographical Review  90  (4):  559-584,  October  2000 Copyright  ? 2001 by  the  American  Geographical Society  of NewYork

and  symbolic  issues  surrounding  its  production.  At the heart of these issues are questions  of  place  and  identity  in a transformed landscape.

## GEOGRAPHERS AND  TOURISM

Although  theme-town  tourism  is  increasingly significant as  a  cultural  and  economic phenomenon,  it has not been the  subject  of much academic  study.  Geographers were  among  the  first  academics to take  tourism  and  recreation seriously  (Christaller 1963;  Williams  and  Zelinsky 1970),  but tourism  research was  poorly integrated  into the  disciplinary mainstream  until  fairly  recently  (Kinnaird and  Hall  1994; Shaw  and Williams  1994; Squire 1994;  Nash  1996; Ioannides  and  Debbage  1998).  Those  who did  study  tourism  primarily  approached it  through  limited theories  and methodologies,  and  often  only  at  the  level  of the  region  or  nation.  Favored were  such  topics as  the  morphology  of tourist  regions,  the  forecasting of volume and  flows  of  travel, and  descriptive models of tourist  development  (Pearce  1989).  Identifying  and analyzing  economically  functional  tourism  regions  dovetailed  with  regional  planning. True,  a handful  of  geographers and  journalists  had  been  "reading" localized  tourist landscapes  for  their  cultural meaning  (Clay  1980;  Lowenthal 1985), but the theoretical debates  over  "old"  and  "new"  cultural  geography that  raged  through  the  198os and into the  199os  had  little  influence  on  geographers studying  tourism.

Of late,  an  ever-increasing number  of articles  and  books focus  on tourism.  Underlying  this fresh  interest  is tourism's  rise  as a  significant  economic  development strategy,  tappable  at  every  scale  from small towns to modest-sized  cities to entire countries.  In 1992  Deyan Sudjic  noted  that,  "as  a force for social  change,  tourism has had an  impact  of the same  order  as  the industrial  revolution.  In  less  than  three decades,  tourism  has  transformed the  way  that  the  world  looks,  and  works" (p. 264). Geographers'  approaches  to tourism have  changed  too.  Although  efforts  lodged within  regional  planning  continue,  new work is  explicitly  tied to other  subfields, including  economic and industrial  geography (Ioannides 1995;  Ioannides and Debbage  1998),  environmental and  development studies (Hall  and  Lew  1998; Mowforth  and  Munt  1998),  and,  increasingly, cultural geography  (Shields  1991; Goss 1993;  Kearns and Philo  1993;  Oakes  1993,1998; Jacobs 1996;  Cloke and Perkins  1998; Hoelscher  1998a, 1998b).

The cultural  turn in tourism  research is related  to the  changing  nature  of tourism itself.  Since  about the  mid-1980s,  with the rise of adventure  and ecotourism, heritage  tourism,  and niche  marketing of cultural  events,  an  entirely new  phase  of tourism has  emerged,  focused on the cultural  component  of tourist  experiences (Craik 1997,113).  This  type  of tourism  is linked to a  postindustrial  economy  associated  with increased production  of cultural  or  symbolic  capital, where  tourists  gain status  from the  types  of  trips  they  take  and the  landscapes  and cultures  they  consume.

Tourism  garners added  interest  as  a form  of  consumption.  Consumption,  especially  shopping,  has  historically been scarce  in the  geography literature. In  fact,  in 1993  Peter  Jackson  commented  on the "relative paucity" of  geographical studies  on

consumption (p. 209).  Geographers  tended  to  privilege  issues of  production,  such as labor, manufacturing,  industrial  location,  or urban  development.  Consumption was elevated in the i99os to a  primary  concern,  reflecting  its  increasing  economic importance  and a renewed interest in  things  cultural  (Gregson 1995).  Scholars from

FIG.  i-A welcoming  road  sign. (Photograph  by Stephen  Frenkel, September  1997)

<!-- image -->

geography  and other  disciplines  are  beginning  to  explore  the links between  culture and  consumption (Zukin 1991;  Crawford  1992;  Goss  1993,1999; Jackson and Thrift 1995;  Urry 1995;  Bell and Valentine  1997;  Miller and others  1998).

John  Urry suggests  that studies of tourist  places represent  one  of the best  ways to illustrate the shift to an  economy  of  consumption (1995).  Places,  he  explains,  take on  new  economic  meaning  as  they  are restructured from  sites of  resource  extrac-

FIG. 2-Location of  Leavenworth,  Washington.  (Cartography  by  Kurt  Schaffer)

<!-- image -->

tion into centers  for  consumption by  visitors  and are  often  literally  consumed  by the  process.  Restructuring involves  the  manipulation  of the  physical  environment as  well  as  the  development  and  marketing of desirable, alluring  images  of  place  and people.  In  fact,  remaking,  re-imaging,  and  literally  re-presenting all sorts of landscapes  have  become  a  multibillion-dollar, worldwide  industry, with numerous  specialized  consulting  firms  competing  to sell the next new,  consumable  destination (Kearns  and Philo  1993;  Beauregard 1998;  Hannigan  1998).

Cultural  geographers  are  exploring  these and other  changes  that occur when places  turn toward  tourism.  Drawing  on theoretical  works  from cultural  studies, sociology,  and other  disciplines,  they  have  begun  to address  such  topics  as  identity politics,  authenticity,  commodification,  and  consumption (MacCannell 1989, 1992; Urry 1990, 1995;  Zukin  1991;  Sorkin  1992; Rojek 1993;  Gottdiener  1997). However, most work  in this  vein  is  focused  on  large cities  (see,  for  example, Judd  and  Fainstein 1999).  Despite  the wide  geographical currency  of the ideas,  only  a few  geographers have examined  the cultural  geography  of tourism in rural  areas  and small towns (Crang 1996;  Hoelscher  1998a, 1998b; Hopkins  1998; DeLyser 1999; Johnson  1999). Fewer  still  have  taken  on the  issue  of theme  towns  (notable  exceptions are  Hoelscher 1998a,  1998b).

Theme towns in the United States  are  not a new  phenomenon. They  became popular  in the  196os  as a creative  antidote  for economic hard  times. The  concept drew  on a number  of ideas  from  the  past:  the cultural pavilions  of  early-twentieth-

century  World's  Fairs,  the touristic  aspects  of ethnic districts  such as Chinatowns and  Little  Italies, and  the idealized  cultural landscapes  first  presented  at  Disneyland (Clay 1980; Engler 1993, 1994). Today  there  are hundreds  of  these  consumptionoriented  theme towns across  the  country,  and  they  are  heavily  promoted  through advertisements, articles,  and  even  Web  sites.  Leavenworth, therefore,  is not  unique as a  type,  though  it is  appropriately unique  in its details  and  history.

## LEAVENWORTH  BEFORE BAVARIA

First  settled in the late nineteenth  century  by  a mix of homesteaders  and miners from all over  the United  States,  Leavenworth became the site of a Great  Northern Railway  switchyard in  1893. It  was  given  a  boost with the construction  of a sawmill in 1904,  and soon thereafter  a  small,  local fruit  industry,  mostly apples  and  pears, developed.  However,  by  the end of the  1920S the railroad  depot  had relocated  to nearby  Wenatchee,  the sawmill  had  closed,  and winter frosts  had  proved  to be a limiting  factor  for orchard  production.  By  1930  Leavenworth's population  was declining,  and  the  town slid  rapidly  into the Great Depression  and  remained  there.  Its turn-of-the-century  buildings  fell into  disrepair, and  by  the  1950S the town, as one resident  recalled with distinct  candor, "looked  like  a  dump"  (LE  1965). Historic  photographs  show  piles  of old  automobiles,  vacant  lots, and  garbage-strewn streets. Making  matters  worse,  divisive  civic  issues,  notably  the  inability  to  pass  a school budget,  sharply  fractured  the  community.

Despite  Leavenworth's general  decline,  there  was  the  occasional  economic  bright spot.  Outdoor  recreation, especially  fishing,  camping,  and  boating,  became  popular  after  World  War  II  (Zinser  1995). This  was  good  news  for  Cascade-region mountain towns,  including  Leavenworth. Increasing  numbers of dollars  were  spent by tourists  passing  through  the  town,  as it was on a main  highway  and close to recreation  sites  (Figure 2).  In  the  early  196os  tourism  was  a  significant  source  of revenue. The rise  in tourism  was  used  to  justify  funding  a  variety  of  place-promotion  activities:  signage,  advertising, tourist information  booths, and  sponsorship  of events. Town  leaders  lobbied  state  officials  for  improved  campgrounds, updated  road  signs, and  stocking  of  nearby  trout  lakes.  Relatively little  attention  was  given  the town of Leavenworth itself;  most  money  went  toward  advertising the  surrounding  area  and its attractions.

Given this wishful context,  it is not  surprising  that in  1962  public  discussion began  on how to use Leavenworth's setting  and  buildings  to best  advantage. Although  most ideas  revolved  around  building  more  motels  and  restaurants, one  proposal  aimed  to turn the  place  into a  "Gay Nineties  town,"  complete  with costumed townsfolk,  "false  fronts and  country stores,  hitching racks,  and cracker  barrels" (Sinclair  1962a). An editorial  in the local  newspaper,  the Leavenworth Echo,  noted that  "all  over  the South  and  East  they  are  making  restorations  of colonial  communities"  and insisted  that  "tourists would welcome a town built  purely  for entertainment"  (Sinclair  1962b). Nothing  came of the  Gay  Nineties  proposal,  but it did start residents  thinking  about  the novel notion  of"theming."

A  significant  move occurred  later  that  year.  Facing  a still-bleak  economic  picture,  local  business  leaders  and  members  of the  Chamber  of Commerce  approached the  University  of  Washington's Bureau  of  Community  Development  in Seattle  for advice  about  reviving  their  town. The  university was then involved  in  facilitating a number of  locally  based economic  development  initiatives  throughout  the state, and it  agreed to  help.  The  result  was  a  two-year  study  called  Leavenworth Improvement for  Everyone (LIFE), which  began  in  1963.  Citizen committees  were formed as a  way  to build  consensus  and  community  solidarity while  tackling  problems  such  as school  funding  and civic  organization. Each  committee  was  to submit a  public  report  with recommended  actions.

One of the most  popular  committees  covered  the  subjects of tourism  and  recreation. For  two  years  members  met  regularly and considered  how best to increase the economic  potential  of tourism in the area.  Speakers from  public  and  private organizations  around  the state  were  brought  to Leavenworth to discuss  the  general benefits  and  promise  of tourism  (LE 1964).  At  first,  following  earlier practice,  most attention  went to the  surrounding  mountains and their  potential  for  drawing  increased  outdoor  recreation. Near  the end of the  process  Leavenworth itself  became a focus.  The  committee's final  report  included  numerous  suggestions,  one of which recommended  that the town  adopt  a theme  (Proceedings  ... 1964).  Swiss,  Alpine, and  Western  were  three  possibilities  put  forth,  with no mention  made  of  basing  the theme in  any  way  on Leavenworth's history.

With  support  from the  larger  LIFE membership,  the committee continued to discuss  the idea  of  theming,  eventually  concentrating on the  potential  of  developing  a Swiss  theme,  based on Leavenworth's mountain  setting.  The  University  of Washington  consultants shared information about  recently developed "alpine" theme towns in the United States,  notably  "Bavarian" Frankenmuth  in  Michigan and "Swiss" New Glarus  in Wisconsin. LIFE  participants  had become convinced that  theming  was the answer  to Leavenworth's problems,  and much was made in the local  press  of tourism's rise  as a  major  industry  (reputed  to be the third  largest in the  state) (LE 1964). Despite  ambitious  hype, however,  little action resulted. Leavenworth was  still,  after  all,  an  impoverished, declining  rural  town  with  virtually no  money  to fund its  schools,  let alone  rebuild  its  "Main  Street" (in this  case,  Front Street).  However,  in  1965  the idea received  a  boost, and,  as one chronicler  put it, "out  of the travail  of economic  insecurity  and  decline  was  born a child of our own imagination.  The  setting  was  perfect-an  alpine  village  with all of the characteristics,  topographically, of a romanticized  Bavarian  village-the  perfect Hollywood setting  for'Heidi'  "(Andersen  1969).

## CHOOSING A THEME

Among  those  paying  attention  to the LIFE committee discussions  were  two Seattle entrepreneurs, Ted  Price  and  Robert  Rodgers. A few  years  earlier  the  pair  had  built a  "Bavarian-style" hotel a few miles outside  Leavenworth, and  they  became convinced that a Bavarian  theme could work in town.  They  were further  spurred  to

action  by  a  trip  to  Solvang,  California,  which fifteen  years  earlier  had remodeled itself  as  an  "authentic" Danish  town.  Impressed  by  the  "enormous  numbers  of visitors and a  thriving  tourist  economy"  in  Solvang,  Price and  Rodgers  envisioned Leavenworth doing something  similar,  so  they spoke  at  length  with  Solvang's designers  (Price  1997,  47).  On their return  to Leavenworth they  described  Solvang's success  to  anyone  and  everyone who would listen.  In  addition,  they purchased  two of Leavenworth's Front  Street buildings  and,  anticipating general "economic  revitalization"-as well  as,  presumably, personal  profits-applied  for  loans to remodel  using  a Bavarian  theme.  Armed  with draft  architectural sketches,  Price  and  Rodgers began  to  persuade  others of the idea's  merits.  A handful of Front  Street  building owners  followed  suit and  had  their  own Bavarian plans  drawn  up.  Soon  afterward, the Chamber  of Commerce  offered  its  backing,  and in June  1965  the  City  Council gave  the  idea a  green light.  The local  newspaper enthusiastically  headlined: "Leavenworth Goes  Alpine!"  (LE 1965).

The  idea  was  one  thing;  building  a  theme  town  was  quite  another. The  first  problem on the road  to Bavarianization was  determining  what a Bavarian  town should look like.  The  second  was  convincing  the rest  of the  businesses  to  buy  into the  idea, for the  project  required  a  high degree  of  participation,  and even a few holdouts could sour the effort.  To  pitch  the new  image  to the  public,  the Chamber  of Commerce  held a series  of  open  meetings.  With advice  from  an architectural consultant, initial  efforts  focused  on  identifying  Bavarian  elements-window  shutters,  window boxes,  and  scalloped  designs  in wood-that  could  add  a  "Bavarian touch"  (LE 1965). Members  then turned  to the  larger  project  of how to remake  downtown facades  in an imitation  Bavarian-Alpine design.  Using photographs,  drawings,  and  pattern books from  Germany  and Switzerland, they  concluded that much of the  existing brick  construction  could  be  utilized,  with the addition  of some stucco.  A few  planners  even created  a  mock-up  of a Bavarianized Front  Street. Despite  many  skeptics in the business  community,  several  merchants  were sold on the idea and became involved  in efforts  to raise capital  for  the  physical  reconstruction. By  the  end  of  1965, local  businesses  and  banks  had committed  enough money  to start  the transformation. Construction  began.

The first  group  of Bavarian-fronted buildings  was dedicated  in the autumn of 1966  (one is seen  in  Figure  3).  The  West  German  consul  came  to Leavenworth from Seattle  for the  event-bringing  his own German  flag  because,  much to the embarrassment  of the  boosters,  they  had  neglected  to order  one  (LE 1977b).  Over  the next few  years,  Leavenworth's Bavarian theme  took off-and  it  would  win the  town  much acclaim.  In  1967  it  garnered  an "All-America City"  designation  for its role in economic revitalization. As more  buildings  were  Bavarianized, tourists  visited  in everincreasing  numbers,  and  for  the first  time in decades  the town achieved  a  degree  of economic  stability. Today  Leavenworth continues  to be featured regularly on a  number of Seattle  television  stations  and in national  newspapers and  magazines;  it has been called  everything  from "tasteless" to "terrific." According  to one  write-up, "It's  cheap, tacky,  and it works"  (Liljengren 1998).

Leavenworth's transition  to a site  of  consumption  and  a consumable  landscape illustrates the  workings  of two  closely  related concepts  that  are  normally  applied  to larger  cities-the  notion of a  "growth machine"  (Logan  and Molotch  1987)  and  the idea  of a  "discourse of  boosterism" (Walton  1997). Both  concepts  depend  on a  widely shared  set of beliefs  about  the benefits  of  growth,  and  each  can  be seen as a  prominent  shaper  of urban  fortunes  in  America, perhaps  due  to the  uniquely  competitive and  speculative  nature  of land  use,  with immense  profits  to be made from real  estate  development.  It is not the  purpose  of this article  to  apply  either  concept  in its entirety  to  Leavenworth, but there are some useful  explanatory  ideas that can be borrowed  from  an  articulation of the  booster  discourse. Specifically, the  theory  posits a set of common  strategies that  boosters  follow  to  "grow" a  place,  strategies seen as legitimate  because  they  are  supported  by  credible  narratives. In the case  of Leavenworth,  four of these  strategies  are  particularly relevant  as recurrent  themes in the town's  transformation: emulation,  authenticity, visual  difference, and  place  promotion.  Though  obviously  interrelated, each  merits  separate  discussion.

## EMULATION

The derivative  nature of tourism  development  is crucial in  understanding  what transpired in  Leavenworth. Whether  places  are  learning from  Las Vegas, from  Disneyland,  or  simply  from  other  successful tourist  places, emulation  is a  key  force  behind landscape  change.  The  assumption  is  that  following  successful examples  will ensure success.  Emulation  serves  as a  legitimizing  narrative  for new  projects  and offers convincing  evidence-that  is,  successful examples-for  doubters  of the  scheme.  Towns and cities  regularly hire  specialized  consultants  or  consulting  firms  to show them how to do what other  places  have done; and  planners  and business leaders  frequently  travel  to successful places  to learn  from  them firsthand.

Leavenworth closely  followed this  typical  scenario  of tourism  developmenttown leaders  pointed  to successes  elsewhere  to convince  residents  and investors  of the  value  and  low risk  of  theming.  Although  they  borrowed specific  ideas  from  New Glarus  and Frankenmuth, promoters  primarily  looked to  Solvang  as a successful example  of a theme town. From the start,  the Leavenworth Echo made  frequent reference  to the  money  that could be made,  reporting,  for  example,  that the  1966 Solvang Danish  Days grossed $14,046 (LE  1966).  The  newspaper  even recommended visits  to  Solvang,  claiming  that  those  who had  gone  "could hardly  wait  to  get  home to tell their friends  of the find"  (Lee  1965).  Leavenworth not  only  borrowed  ideas from  Solvang,  it borrowed  two  designers  to draw  up  a set of Bavarian designs  and supervise  initial  construction  in  1966.

Based  heavily  on written  texts,  the  production  of tourist  landscapes is a  highly intertextual process  in  every  sense  of the  word.  Rural towns,  for  example, have  available  a  variety of how-to  books  to draw  on,  from  the  Rural  Tourism Handbook (USTTA 1994),  to  Promoting  Tourism  in RuralAmerica  (Heise 1994),  to Travel  and Tourism:  A Legislator's Guide  (Loyacono  1991). Each  offers  examples  of what  works  where  and how to  replicate  it.  Many  of these books refer  to other  widely  read  texts on  plan-

FIG.  3-The  Bavarian facade  on the  Hotel  Tyrol in  Leavenworth, Washington.  (Photograph by  Stephen Frenkel, September  1997)

<!-- image -->

ning,  design,  or  tourism.  Specialized organizations, such  as  the  National  Main  Street Center  or  Washington  State's Municipal  Research  and Services  Center,  offer  additional resources  and  guidance. The  latter,  for  example,  maintains  a  Web  site  with a Central  Business  District  page, [http://www.mrsc.org/econ/ed-cbd.htm], that includes  sample  plans  and  design guidelines  for theme towns such as Leavenworth. Ironically, although  millions  of dollars  are  spent  to achieve  a  unique  "look"  or ambience,  with so  many  towns  following  the same texts  the result  is a rather  limited, familiar  set of  highly  scripted  tourist  landscapes.

With Leavenworth's development  under  way,  the Chamber  of Commerce  and City  Council  began  to formalize relationships with other  theme  towns.  Leavenworth joined  in a  sister-city  arrangement with New Glarus  in  1966,  subscribed  to  newspapers  from various  theme towns, and,  in the  early  1970s, hosted a series  of themetown  summits,  where  the  mayors  of Frankenmuth and  Leavenworth met  to  compare festivals,  restaurants, and architecture. Even  today,  a  great  deal  of  interchange takes place  among  theme towns. For  example,  in 1990,  when  music-licensing  organizations claimed  that  the  city  was  piping  patented  polka  music all over  town without proper  licensing,  Leavenworth business  leaders  looked  to see  what  other  places  had done about  the issue.  The  answer  was  found in  Solvang, which had resolved  a similar  situation  by having  the Chamber  of Commerce  buy  a site  license  (LE  199ob).

Even  as it continued  to emulate  Solvang  and  New  Glarus,  Leavenworth became a  model  of success  for  other  aspiring theme  towns  to imitate.  Emissaries from  across

the United States  and from as far  away  as Costa  Rica  came to Leavenworth to see what  worked  and  how.  Each  visit  was  promoted  in the  local  newspaper, and  Leavenworth soon saw itself as a leader in  theming.  It shifted from the imitator  to the imitated.

The idea that other  towns were  emulating  Leavenworth served  to reinforce  its importance,  and its "Bavarianness" became a  point  of local  pride.  Some residents even  specialized in  telling  the Leavenworth story  to  people  from  other  towns  (Humphreys 1998).  A  1969 newspaper  editorial enthused: "How  proud people  are now to hear  visitors  exclaim  over  our home town.... How different  is the attitude,  especially  among  the  young people.  These  young people  are not  only proud  of their home,  they  show  respect  for the valuable attractions which  it contains"  (LE 1969).

In  1971  the Leavenworth Echo  identified  several  national  newspapers  that had printed  stories  about  Leavenworth, and it listed  half a dozen  towns in  Washington that  were  considering themes.  Most  of these  eventually followed  through  with their plans,  including  "Dutch" Lynden,  "Scandinavian" Stanwood,  "Norwegian" Poulsbo, "Colonial"  Cashmere,  and "Western" Winthrop.

A  driving  force  behind  emulation  is  competition  among  cities.  American  cities and  towns  constantly  compete  for  limited  resources, be  they  tourist  dollars  or  other revenue  sources.  But  because they  are  often  playing a  zero-sum game,  imitation  can  be threatening as  well  as  flattering. Although  Leavenworth's promoters  enjoyed the  attention of other  towns,  they  were  wary  of  nearby places  that  threatened to emulate  them too  closely. In  1994 the  newspaper ran  a  series on the  town  of  Kellogg, Idaho, which  also planned  to become  Bavarian. The  Washington  boosters  worried  that  Kellogg  might undermine  Leavenworth's  claim to fame  (LE  1994);  they  called the  prospect  "a  wakeup  call for Leavenworth" (Landis 1994a,  1).  Newspaper  columnists  denigrated  Kellogg's chances  for  success, scorning  the  former  silver-mining town  for  being  "larger, poorer, less educated than Leavenworth"  (Landis 1994a, 1)  and  noting  that it needed to  tap "government aid"  for  its  development.  "All that  government  money may  not be the best  way," wrote one citizen,  explaining  that Leavenworth "made  it work because we took  pride  in what we were  doing" (Landis 1994c, 5).  Pride  and  commitment became  important  ingredients  in the  mythology  of Leavenworth's success.

## DESIGNING  AUTHENTICITY

Copying  successful  places  is  important  in the  production  of a themed  landscape, but no less  so is  representing the  place  as  real  or  authentic. Authenticity  is a  polyvalent  concept,  presenting  different meanings  to different people.  Given  the  impossibility  of a  genuine  Bavarian village  in  the  United  States, clearly Leavenworth's creators had  to define  what  they  meant  by"authentic." In  Leavenworth and  most  other  theme towns,  tourist  spaces  are  organized  around  what  Dean  MacCannell  (1989, 1992) called  "staged  authenticity," a verisimilitude self-consciously  constructed.  Creators of such  spaces  tend to obsess over the  quality  of the  copy,  striving  for as real  or genuine-looking  a fake as  possible.  The  semiologist  Umberto Eco cited this as a peculiarity of American  culture,  describing the United  States  as  "a  country  obsessed

with  realism, where,  if a  reconstruction is  to  be  credible, it  must  be  absolutely iconic, a  perfect  likeness,  a 'real' copy  of the  reality  being represented" (1986,  4).  Such  obsessions have  very  real  economic  consequences,  because  authenticity  is often the primary  selling  point  for tourists  (Urry  1995; Hoelscher  1998a).  The need for authenticity  is mentioned  over  and  over  again  in the  how-to literature. For  example,  a handbook  on rural  tourism  aimed  at  Washington State  legislators reports  that  tourists  primarily  seek  "interesting architecture, a sense of local  history  and  heritage, the taste of ethnic  cuisine,  and the  experience of unique  and authentic cultural activities"  (Loyacono  1991,  21;  emphasis  added).

In Leavenworth, an authentic  heritage  or culture  was out of the  question,  because  the town lacked  any  discernible  Bavarian  roots or ties.  Authentic  translated largely as  visual  conformity, adhering  as  closely  as  possible  to the  physical  design  of archetypal  villages  in  Germany.  The aim was "to create  the image of a Bavarian village  that  looked  to be over  1oo  years  old"  (Price  1997,  o10). A  University  of Washington  consultant  promised  residents, "If you  concentrate  on the faithful  reproduction of an  Alpine  Village  you  stand  every  chance  of  becoming  one of the  significant cultural  centers  in the Pacific  Northwest"  (Andersen  1969).  In  this  sense,  authenticity  derived  its  credibility  from the  quality  of the  copy.  With the motto, "Make  it authentic,  or don't  do it at all"  (Price  1997,  60), designers drafted  a series  of elaborate  planning  documents  and  design  guidelines.  From  the  beginning,  little  was  left to chance.  In addition  to the two  Solvang  designers, an  expert  Solvang  artisan  was brought  in for  his  skills  in  "techniques for  quickly  aging  and  antiquing  wood"  (Price 1997, 66).  In  a further  quest  for  visual  authenticity,  the  town  commissioned the construction  of a Bavarian  clock tower  and hired  a German  artist  to  paint  murals on  building  walls.

Achieving  an authentic look  rapidly  extended  beyond building design.  Avid boosters  grew  concerned  about  the  appropriateness of merchandise  sold in  stores, periodically  urging  that it at least  look somewhat  Bavarian. Bavarian-style cuckoo clocks  and German  baked  goods  were  encouraged;  Scandinavian gifts  and  English tea  sets  were  officially frowned  upon.  The  regulation  of Bavarian content,  however, was  never  strictly  enforced,  and  shopkeepers  constantly  pushed  the bounds toward more  pan-European  offerings. Boosters  had  more success  with dress.  The  town actually adopted  an "authentic"  dress code-lederhosen  for men and dirndls for women-and  various  attempts  were  made  to  inspire  more  residents  to look and  act the  part.  Finally, to remove  all  lingering  doubt  about  the  nature  of the  theme,  "lively Bavarian  music, with  yodeling  and  oom-pah-pah,  the zither and the accordion" was  played  over town  loudspeakers  for all to hear  (Price 1997,34).  In  addition,  there were  live  performances, including  two  lederhosen-clad  musicians  who called  themselves  "The  Tyroleans" (Figure  4).  With  such  music,  and  with  the  aromas  of schnitzel and  spaetzle  wafting  through  the  streets,  Bavarian  Leavenworth quickly  became a full  sensory  experience.

Thus did the town become a theme  park.  In  fact,  it was all  the easier  for  image makers  because  they  did not have  to sanitize  a local  history,  package a  heritage,  or

commodify  an indigenous culture.  The town's  reputation  was linked  only  to its perceived  authenticity, its  convincing  realness. And in this it  was  quite  successful; as the former consultant  from the  University  of  Washington  remarked: "It  is VERY

FIG.  4-An advertisement  for live German music  in  Leavenworth, Washington.  (Photograph  by Stephen  Frenkel, September  1997)

<!-- image -->

realistic....  [To]  the  unsuspecting tourist...  it is  quite  convincing. I  am  sure  that  at some time or another  tourists  have  entered  shops speaking  fluent  German,  being somewhat  taken  aback  when the  proprietor confessed  that  he was  not  really  Bavarian,  but was from Iowa,  Missouri-or  some other  incomprehensible  place; [and] that he had never  even BEEN  to visit the  Alps"  (Anderson  1969).

Boosters  received  a  great  deal  of  support  from  the  Leavenworth Echo.  From  the start,  the  publisher and  several writers  made  it  known  that  the town  was  involved  in

an authentic  project. Even  before  the first building  was  themed,  several  articles by  a guest  columnist  sought  to educate  readers  about Bavarian history  and culture  and compared  Leavenworth's look and  setting  to the Bavarian  town of  Oberammergau (Warnek  1965a, 1965b).  Periodic  articles  heralded  the visits  of"genuine"  Germans, including  a "famed German wood  carving  expert"  who  visited  in  1972 (LE 1972). After  the theme took off,  the  newspaper  regularly  printed  letters  from enamored tourists  who likened  their  Leavenworth visit  to a  European experience.  Said  one,  "It was as if we had driven  out of the mountains  into Kitzbuhl,  Austria" (Streur  1982). An editorial  excerpted  favorable  comments sent in  by  German  visitors,  including the observation of  Leavenworth's "very  close  family  resemblance  to  GarmischPartenkirchen  and  to  Oberammergau"  (LE g99oa).  Such  appealing  comparisons reinforced  Leavenworth's discourse  of  authenticity.

However,  the  importance  of the  visual  led to a formidable  issue:  how to enforce authenticity  in new  buildings.  Early  designs  were  largely  determined  by  business owners who drew-rather  loosely-on  a shared  body  of  expert  knowledge,  but  by 1970  a number  of  buildings  had  been erected by  more  individualistic  newcomers  in what were considered  inauthentic  styles.  The  City  Council and the Chamber  of Commerce  took notice, and in  1970  the council created  an  advisory  Leavenworth Design  Review  Board.  In  1976  the  City  Planning  Commission,  taking  over  the duties of the  Design  Review  Board,  wrote a series  of Bavarian  Guidelines  for Downtown  Buildings, which  were  enacted  two  years later  as  part  of a  formal  design-review process for  the  downtown.  The  guidelines were  based  on Bavarian architecture books, five  of which  were  cited  as  examples  to follow  (Leavenworth Municipal  Code  1996). For  its  part,  with advice  from  residents  and  planners  who had  been to  Germany  or Austria,  the Chamber  of Commerce  put together  a  photographic  stylebook  of authentic Bavarian  signs,  roofs,  windows,  flower  boxes, doorknobs,  and traditional costumes  (Price  1997, 87).  Every building  was  expected  to be  designed  and  scaled  to match  the  guidelines-even  chain  stores  and fast-food  restaurants (Figure  5).

However,  as  yet  more merchants  opened shop  in Leavenworth, it  grew  evident that not  everyone  was  following  the  guidelines.  By  the  early  1980s  the  newspaper began lobbying  for  stronger  enforcement  of  authenticity.  The Chamber  of Commerce,  suggesting that  "a  little  education  ...  in  design  matters" was  needed,  offered prospective builders sample  slides,  photographs, and  stylebooks for  guidance  (Lynch 1982). But all  of these  efforts  seemed  to make  little  difference. By  the  early  199os an increasing  number  of  shops  were  selling  non-German  items,  and more and more buildings  deviated  from  the  original  vision.  Reflecting  rising  concern,  a  newspaper headline  pleaded,  "Keep Bavarian  Theme  Alive  in Downtown"  (Riise  1991).

In  1993  the Leavenworth Design  Review  Screening  Committee,  an ad hoc subcommittee of the  City  Planning  Commission,  dropped  a bombshell:  Leavenworth was not  really  Bavarian! According  to an architectural consultant,  despite  the German trim  only  10  percent  of the  town's  commercial buildings  were  "surfaced in true Bavarian  style"  (Goehner 1993,  i).  The rest  were,  at best,  representative of other regions  in  Germany  and Switzerland and, at  worst,  not even  European.  "Literally

FIG.  5-A  Bavarianized McDonald's restaurant in Leavenworth,  Washington. (Photograph  by Stephen Frenkel, June 1999)

<!-- image -->

hundreds  of Germans  have  told us  they  love Leavenworth but that it's  not Bavarian,"  said the committee  co-chair  in an interview  (Goehner  1993,  i).  As a  result,  the committee, after  reviewing  yet again  a number of German  architectural pattern books,  prepared new  guidelines  describing the format  of "true" Bavarian  architecture.  Surprising most  people,  the half-timbered  style popular  in the  early  days  of Leavenworth theming  was  left  out,  because  it  was  said  to  represent a  different region of  Germany. Loose  interpretations were  tightened  up.  Explained the  co-chair,  "We've said  we would do Old  World  Bavaria-that's  our code. But  we include  designs  that are  not.  They're in  Germany, but  they're not Old  World  Bavaria. We've  mixed  things that  are  not mixed  in Bavaria" (p.  8).  He offered  an  analogy:  "Suppose  Leavenworth were  to start  anew  and  say  they  were  going  to use Southern  U.S.  architecture. Then they  also  included  Cape  Cod houses in their  plans.  That's  kind of what we've  done here"  (p. 8).

The committee's new  guidelines,  which were  eventually incorporated  into Leavenworth's municipal  code,  delineated  firm  boundaries  for  "Old  World  Bavaria," extending  "from  the Bavarian  forest  along  the Czech  border  to Garmisch-Partenkirchen  on the Austrian  border,  then east  along  the Austrian  border  to Berchtesgaden  and Passau"  (Leavenworth  Municipal  Code  1996).  This  region  included the cities of  Regensberg  and Munich,  but not  Nuremberg  or  Rothenberg.  And, the  guidelines reiterated,  because Leavenworth  was "a small  village  located in the mountains" the  "Bavarian-Alpine  style"  was most  appropriate.  This  style  is

typified  by  the  Bauernhaus,  a  regional  variation  of the farmhouse  reflecting  particular conditions  of  climate,  amount  of  snow,  and cold  temperatures.  The Bauernhaus,  according  to the  guidelines,  was the  predominant building style  in Bavarian  villages  and small towns and was not  to be confused with  a chalet. Within  this  style,  it was  carefully noted,  there  were  "more  than  adequate  variations from Garmisch  to Passau  to allow for  individuality  in  building designs"  (Leavenworth  Municipal  Code  1996).

Another  important  outcome of the  screening  committee's  report  was the  1995 creation  of a  freestanding Design  Review  Board,  separate  from the  Planning  Commission,  with stricter  requirements. Members  now needed  specific  Bavarian design experience  to serve  on the board.  They  could  qualify  by meeting  at  least  two of the following  criteria: travel  throughout  Bavaria, with extended  periods  of time  spent there  on at  least  three  occasions;  knowledge  of Bavarian architecture; knowledge  of Bavarian design  elements,  such as color  of window  treatments,  murals,  overhangs, and  building  materials;  and demonstration,  via travel  throughout Germany, Austria,  and  Switzerland, of the  ability  to differentiate among regional  design  elements (Walters  1995).

Despite  these renewed  efforts,  concern  that the  original  Bavarian  mission was lost-or perhaps  was not even accurate  to  begin with-lingered  through  the mid199os. Pauline  Watson,  a business  owner and a  pioneer  in  establishing  the theme, complained  that "the  city  had lost its  way, [that]  too  many  merchants  had  jettisoned the Bavarian  theme"  (Gauger 1995).  In June  1996  a new committee  was formed with a  special  mission: the "re-Bavarianization" of  Leavenworth.  Called  Projekt Bayern  (with  its own Web  site at  [http://www.projektbayern.com/]), its members were  "devoted  to  resurrecting and  promoting  the town's  Bavarian  theme"  (Gauger 1996).  In an  open  letter  to all  citizens,  the committee  argued that  "by  doing  more  to exalt  the Bavarian theme,  Leavenworth would ensure  its  uniqueness,  strengthen  its appeal  to visitors and  preserve  the livelihoods of those who live and work here" (Gauger  1996).  Projekt Bayern  came  up  with a  new series  of ideas  for  re-creating the look and  feel  of a  typical  Bavarian-Alpine town.  These  included  the installation  of a town  maypole  and "the  wearing  of German  clothing by  locals  every  Friday." Also recommended  was  a  used  Bavarian clothing  sale  to  "recycle and  offer  German  clothing  for  all...  at  reasonable prices" (Gauger  1996).  Cultural  education  figured  prominently:  Committee  members  published  and distributed  authentic  Bavarian recipes and  printed  a  weekly  column with information  about the  people  and customs of the  German  region.  They  also  worked  to  promote  sister-city ties  with  Bavarian towns in  Germany, pointing  to similar  relationships fostered  by  Frankenmuth  and Helen (Howell  1997a).

Some ideas  for  re-Bavarianization tested  the  limits  of  authenticity. For  example, at one  point  the owner of a local hotel  argued  that "goats  are  needed to  help  enhance  the Bavarian theme"  and  requested a  variance  from  an  ordinance  that  banned farm  animals  in town. He envisioned  making  "the  hills of Leavenworth come alive with the sound of Bavaria-or at least  the  tinkling  of bells and the sound of  goats

bleating"  (Ahrendes  1996).  The council considered  giving  him a  one-year  trial  to allow  goats  to  graze  on a  newly  built  putting  green,  but it decided  that  this  was  the wrong  kind of  authenticity.

The  quest  for  authenticity  in Leavenworth contains a number of ironies.  The very  use of the term is  ironic,  given  that  Leavenworth is an authentic  Bavarian village  only  inasmuch  as  it is an  authentic  fake.  It  is a  replica not of a real village  but  of an  imaginary, composite  Bavarian village.  In  this  sense  it is no more  authentic  than Disneyland  is.  Second,  Leavenworth's cultural  authenticity  is somewhat  haphazard and  hybridized. Events  of dubious  Bavarian character  have  arisen,  such  as  a  Square Dance  Weekend,  a Great  Bavarian  Chili  Fest  in  1990,  and the annual  Der  Quacken Floaten,  a race  between  floating  "plastic duckies"  on the  Wenatchee  River. Surprisingly,  there  was no Oktoberfest  until  1998,  although  such a celebration  would be expected  in  any  faux  Bavarian town. But  because  drinking  was  discouraged at  outdoor events  in order  to maintain  a  "family  image," the tradition  of Oktoberfest  was initially  scripted  out of Leavenworth's landscape,  replaced  by  an  Autumn  Leaf  Festival.  However, with the recent  rise  of microbreweries, and as a  way  to attract  more tourist  dollars,  alcohol  is now a  large  part  of several  events.

Finally, there is the issue of  design authenticity.  Although  the  experts  drafted ever more elaborate  guidelines  and codes,  it was clear  these were not  being  followed.  Despite  the  best  re-Bavarianization efforts,  matters became  messier  once  new projects  headed  down the  slippery  slope  to  inauthenticity. The  irony  is that it no longer  seemed  to matter  to  anyone  but the Bavarianization "police." Leavenworth was a success  economically, and visitors  seemed  to ask  for  little  more  than  a  generalized German  or even Austrian  ambience.  Was it  necessary  to  police  the  design boundaries?  Did the notion of  authenticity  really  help  convince  people  to visit and shop  in Leavenworth? Perhaps  authenticity was not as  important  to visitors  as  was the mere  fact  of difference.

## SHOPPING  WITH  A DIFFERENCE

The  completely  invented  nature  of Leavenworth is no secret.  Indeed,  a  prominent interpretive display  proudly  documents  the whole  process  of Bavarianization. Few people, therefore,  have illusions about the town's  authentic  heritage.  So  why  are visitors  attracted  to Leavenworth? We  suggest  that  they  are  attracted  in  large  part because  the  town  is  visually different, offering a  novel  environment  in  which  to  shop, eat,  and  play.  Tourism, in  fact, is  said  to  be  most  successful in  such  places of difference. As Sharon  Zukin  asserts, "People  like  to consume;  they  seek  their  social  identity  in shopping,  comparing  goods,  and  talking about  consumption.  They  find  drama,  history,  and  variety  in new  spaces  of  consumption"  (1991, 254-255).

In  almost  every  sense,  Leavenworth, with its  Bavarian murals,  lampposts,  flower pots,  and  half-timbering, reflects  a form of  Disneyfied  cultural  tourism.  This  was recognized  by  boosters  as  early  as  1969,  when  they proudly  noted that  the community  had "taken  a lesson"  from  Disneyland  (LE 1969).  The town is indeed  the ultimate  themed  shopping  district: Visitors  can  experience  a taste  of Bavaria  without

having  to travel  overseas, convert  currency, or  speak  another  language. As one tourist  marveled,  "You  can find  gifts  from countries that would take  you  all summer travelling in  Europe" (Lee  1977).  Even  the Leavenworth Web  site  proudly  proclaims that  you  can  "practice  your  German  language  skills,  learn about Bavarian  traditions, food,  clothing,  visit an  Austrian  bed and  breakfast, a Bavarian  woodworker's shop,  the Leavenworth Nutcracker  Museum,  learn Bavarian  folk dances  and have fun with all  of us  without  leaving  the United  States" (Herzlich  Willkommen!  1998).

Selling  "authentic" Bavarian merchandise  and  food,  such  as  cuckoo  clocks,  bratwurst,  and  alpenstocks,  is an  integral  part  of the town's  identity  as a site of consumption.  A  reporter  speculating on  why  people  visit concluded  that  shopping  was what  they  found  "most  appealing  about Leavenworth" (Loney  1997,  1).  This  fits  the pattern: According  to various  studies,  shopping  is a  very  important  part  of the  tourism  experience  (Beauregard 1998; Debbage  and  Daniels  1998).  One  study  found that even in the  "country  music  capital" of Branson,  Missouri,  "more  visitors  said shopping  lured  them to town than the live entertainment  that made the rural  city famous."  The same  report  found that in Las  Vegas,  Nevada,  of 8,000 travelers  surveyed,  "67  percent  listed  shopping  as a  major  activity, while 18  percent  listed  gambling"  (Beck  1998). This  type  of tourism  could  be  called  "shopping with a  difference" -it is all  about  finding  new  environments  in which to consume.  The  shopping  environment is itself  consumable,  and it is a crucial  part  of the  symbolic economy surrounding  every  sale.

Quarterly  sales-tax  figures  collected  from  the  Washington  State  Department  of Revenue  confirm  Leavenworth's retail  success  (Figure  6). Reported tax  revenues  for Leavenworth are  consistently double  those of like-sized  towns,  such  as  neighboring Cashmere  or  nearby  Okanogan,  each of which has a smaller  stream  of tourists. Note,  however,  that  Leavenworth's retail  activities  exhibit  a  marked seasonality, with a  pronounced  winter  drop,  despite  efforts  to  encourage  year-round visitation.

## MAINTAINING LEAVENWORTH THROUGH  PLACE MARKETING  AND  PROMOTION

Despite  Leavenworth's success,  it still  must  compete  with other  towns for tourists. And to be successful  today,  places  cannot  rely  on the Field  of  Dreams  philosophy, "Build  it and  they  will come."  Rather, they  must follow the  marketing  strategy that we describe  as "Promote  it and  they  will  partake." The  marketing  aspects  of tourism  development  have been the focus of much academic  study (for example, Ashworth  and  Goodall  1990;  Kearns and  Philo  1993;  Gold  and  Ward  1994).  In Leavenworth, this  job largely falls  to the Chamber  of  Commerce,  which  has undertaken  active  place  promotion  since  the  start.  One  of its  most  visible  efforts, begun  in the  mid-1960s,  features  a  village  float-mounted  by  a  crack  team  of lederhosen-clad "Royal  Bavarians"-that  is  dispatched  to  parades  and festivals  throughout  the region,  such as  Vancouver, British  Columbia's Pacific  Northwest  Exposition,  Seattle's Seafair,  Olympia's Lakefair,  and  Spokane's  Lilac Festival  (LE 1977a).

The chamber  has  hired  public-relations specialists and  advertising agencies  that target  the Seattle market  (LE 1975,  1981).  The focus until  recently  was  mainly  on two

groups  of tourists:  those interested  in the outdoors,  and those interested  in  shopping.  But  in the  early  g99os  Leavenworth began  to  target  a new  type  of visitor-the conventioneer. Using  available  off-season  hotel facilities  as a draw,  businesses  attempted  to  bring  small  conventions  to town. The chamber  sent out  2,500  mailers statewide,  listing  available facilities  (Landis  1993). Soon there  was  talk  of  building  a convention  center,  although  as of  January 2001  nothing  had  yet  come of it.

Leavenworth's array  of  special  outdoor events and Bavarian-related spectacles further  enhances  the  fantasy  shopping landscape  and attracts  yet  more tourists. The  town's signature  event,  the  Autumn  Leaf  Festival, brings  in  thousands  of visitors each  year.  Leavenworth today  has a  major  festival  for  every  season  and at least  one event  each  month.  In addition  to the  Mai  Fest  celebration of  spring,  popular  events include  a Christmas lighting  festival  and  an international  accordion  celebration.

An  important  aspect  of  maintaining the  tourist  landscape is  downplaying events that  might  detract  from  the town's  image,  for  image  is  all-important to  place  promotion and retail  receipts.  The  great  central Washington  fires  of  1994  are  instructive.  During  that  summer's prime  tourist  season,  nearby  forest  fires  scorched  more than 100,000 acres,  threatened  the town, and  effectively  eliminated  tourism  from the area  after  the main  highway  was forced to close. Fire-related  business  losses were estimated at  $175,000 per day (Landis 1994b).  More worrisome  to town boosters was the fact that, because  the  firefighting  effort was based in  Leavenworth, the fires would  become  associated with  the town.  Indeed,  many  outsiders  incorrectly assumed  that  all  the  hills  surrounding Leavenworth  had  burned.  To counter such  ideas  the town  made  extra efforts "to maintain  and reinforce  the  image  of Leavenworth  through  cooperative  advertising,  press  releases,  news bulletins  and contacts  with  travel writers  and  tour  companies" (Landis  1994b, 1).  More  than $100,000 was  paid  to  a Seattle  advertising  company to  develop a  postfire  campaign  (Davis  1994a).  Local  residents  were  repeatedly  exhorted  to  "help  market Leavenworth"  (Davis  1994b),  and  the  Leavenworth Echo  published stories  from other  tourist  towns  that  had  experienced disasters  and  bounced back,  proving that  such  events  were  only  temporary.  Examples  included  Galena, Illinois,  which had  recovered from  floods;  Winthrop,  Washington,  which  had  recovered from  a $1  million  building  fire;  and Yellowstone National  Park,  which  had  quickly  recovered from  major  fires.

## LIVING  IN  LEAVENWORTH

So  what  is  it  like  to  live  in  Leavenworth? How  have  residents  responded  to  the changes?  Hal Rothman  correctly argues  in his  aptly  named  book,  Devil's  Bargains, that "the embrace of tourism  triggers  a contest  for the soul of a  place" (1998, 11).  In 1980  the Office  of  Community  and  Organizational Development  at the  University of  Washington  ran a  survey  called LIFE II, sixteen  years  after the  original program, with the  explicit goal  of  gauging public opinion  of Bavarianization in Leavenworth and  surrounding  areas. A slim  majority  of the town's residents viewed  tourism  as positive  (more  than  50 percent  approved  of it  regardless  of how  the  question  was

FIG. 6-Comparative  quarterly sales-tax revenues  for  selected  sites  in  central  Washington State.  Source: Washington  State  Department  of Revenue.  (Graph  by Stephen  Frenkel)

<!-- image -->

worded);  two-thirds  of the  nearby rural  residents  were  opposed  to  any  more  Bavarianization  and  believed  that  they  derived  little  benefit  from  it  (LE  1980).  The dissenting  sentiment was  typified  by  a letter to the editor that demanded,  "How much more do we have  to  give  up  for  tourism?...  Get  your  head  out of the sand  and  quit letting  tourism  bury  us!"  (Waters  1980).

To find out more about attitudes  toward  tourism,  we conducted a  variety  of interviews,  and  we examined  every  issue  of the  weekly  Leavenworth Echo  from  1959 to  1999.  This  newspaper, with its consistent  reports  on the Bavarianization process and minutes of  City  Council,  Chamber  of Commerce,  and  community meetings, offers  the  only  continuous  official  record  of the  production  of this  landscape.  Furthermore,  although  its  editorials embody  the  booster  discourse,  published  letters  to the editor  reveal  other,  more  negative,  voices:  "Oh  Leavenworth, what will become of  you?  Is  your  commercial  exploitation  worth the cost?  Are  you  to be an amusement  park dependent  on the whims of the tourist?  Or will  you  return  to a selfsufficient  community  able  to sustain  itself  through  economic  perils  of the future?" (Maxham  1991).

Based  on this research, it  appears  that for  many,  if not  most,  people  the main drawback  of  living  in Leavenworth  is,  perhaps unsurprisingly,  the number of visitors-thousands  per  day  during  the summer.  There  is a  great  deal  of  grumbling about the  consequences,  especially  the  impact  on  parking.  Locals  claim that  they

can  never  find  a  parking  place  because  tourists  fill  them  up,  and  even  tourists  complain  about  having  to drive  around  for  twenty  minutes  or more  looking  for a  spot (LE  1990g). In the  early  199os the  mayor  drew fire with a  proposal  that business owners and  employees  park  farther  away  to maximize the number of convenient parking  places  available  to tourists:  "Parking near  your workplace  is more convenient.... But,  it's  also  counterproductive. If downtown  parking  spaces  are  filled, visitors  eventually  will  give up, taking  their business somewhere  else"  (LE 1993). Despite  heated  resistance, the  city  continued  to  promote  the  idea  of  parking  farther from work. Not  many  workers  and business owners  agreed.  Said  one, "I am ... upset  about the fact that the merchants  and  employees  of Leavenworth are  being partially blamed  because  we take  up parking  spaces"  (Christensen-Darling 1995).

Another  repeated  complaint  about  living  in Leavenworth is the  high prices,  in both  housing  and retail  markets,  caused  by  increased  demand.  Residents  felt  that they  were  being  forced  to  shop  farther  away. A  1972  letter  to the editor  read:  "What about  the  local  people  who TRY  to do some  shopping  at  the  local  store? Usually  it is easier  to drive  down  the  valley where  there  is  plenty  of  parking (and  prices  have  not been marked  up)"  (Mathews  1972).  Comments  in the  newspaper could also  bring  a response-bordering  on a rebuke-from the Chamber  of Commerce,  which at one point opined:  "If Leavenworth  merchants  were  guilty  of  overpricing  . . .  people would not return  time after  time"  (Conkling  1982). We  also  found a  general  awareness that  tourist-oriented  service  wages  were  at the low end of the  wage  scale.  The issue of  prices  and  wages  has remained  a sore one. In  fact,  certain  stores  recently started  a  "locals-only  week"-meaning  discounts  for  locals-during  the off season (Zimmerman  1997),  and  many  restaurants offer  an unadvertised "local's discount." Housing prices,  too, have  been affected.  Rents  in  1995  were  reported  to be "much higher  than the income level of the clerks" (Burke  1995).  And since the mid-199os, housing prices  have  risen  by  an  average of  14  percent  per  year.

A  recurring  complaint  of  many  old-timers  is their  feeling  that  tourism  has  destroyed  Leavenworth's sense of  community  and  self-sufficiency. As  early  as  1976  a resident  lamented, " [We]  lost  something  very  precious  ...  the  closeness  of the  community"  (LE 1976).  In  1991 a  correspondent  wrote to the Leavenworth Echo:  "When you  ask  yourself  if'Bavaria' has made  the  quality  of life  better  for  your  town,  think: Do  passing  neighbors  stop  to  say  hello  more,  do the children  sing  and  dance  more, do  grandparents smile and  laugh  more?" (Maxham  1991,  8).  And in  1994  a woman who was  worried  about drunken  tourists  asked,  "Why  do we allow  these  visitors  to pollute  our  family  environment?" (Chapman-Bellomo  1994).

Finally, residents complain  frequently about  tourism  interfering with  traditional economic activities,  among  them  agriculture. A local farmer  reacted  with  resignation to a  proposal  to locate  a bed-and-breakfast (B  and  B)  establishment just  outside town:  "Inviting tourists  into the orchards  is akin  to  inviting  trouble  into  your own home. In  fact,  if a  B  and  B  is allowed  to  go  into business  at  the  back  of  Williams Canyon,  tourists  will drive  through  the orchards on their  way  to the  bed  and  breakfast  and  occasionally  spray  from the  surrounding  orchards  will drift  onto cars  and

bodies"  (Adam 1990). Clearly  the farmer  was worried about lawsuits  that could result  from accidental  exposure  to  pesticides.

Not  surprisingly, the  negative reactions  had  a  distinct  temporal  dimension.  Some of the most vehement occurred in the  1970s  and  very early  198os,  a time when memories of the  pre-Bavarian past  were still  alive,  albeit  increasingly distant.  "Have  we created a monster?" asked a resident  in  1972 (Dirkse  1972).  Others  questioned  the town's  priorities, concerned  that  a  compulsive  push  for  greater numbers  of tourists and the  provision  of tourist services  would be  paid  for out of local  pockets.  One person  wrote in  anger,  "WHAT  ABOUT THE PEOPLE  OF THE TOWN!!!"  (Waters  1974).  Another  complained,  "The  residents  of Leavenworth cannot afford  all these extra  expenses  that  tourism  has  brought  just  so a few merchants  can make  a fast dollar"  (Mathews 1974).

Editorials by  newspaper staff  attempted to  put  a  positive  spin  on residents' complaints.  In  acknowledging parking  problems,  one writer  argued, "At  such  times,  it's easy  to see the  bad  side  of tourism.  Which  makes  it a  good  time to remember  some of the  positive  things  that  visitors  bring  with  them,  like  jobs  for local  people"  (LE 1982).  Other  editorials  exhorted  townsfolk  to behave  better,  to  put  on a  nice  face  for tourists.  An  op-ed piece  bore the title,  "Come  On, Leavenworth, Let's  Be Nice to Visitors"  (Lattimer 1995).

Today,  after  thirty  years  of  relatively  unrestrained  Bavarianization, tourism is viewed  more as a bedrock  industry  than as an economic  option, especially  because few  people  remember  a time before flower-bedecked buildings  and mass tourism (Figure  7).  It is  widely accepted  that  "the  community  is built  upon  the economic backs  of those who visit here"  (Hickman  1994).  What resistance  there  is  generally takes  a fatalistic  tone.  As  one resident put  it,  "We  must  learn  to  sleep  in our  touristmade  beds"  (Hickman  1994);  another,  the chair  of the Leavenworth Planning  Commission in the  1960s,  contended,  "Whether  we like it or not, tourism is the  major business  for  Leavenworth and its  surrounding  area.  This  will continue  as  far  as  you want to  project  it into the future"  (Booth 1991). Although  residents  still  worry  that planners  will  "sell  [the]  town's  soul for  tourism" (Beardsley  1994),  few at this  point are  suggesting  alternative futures.  Rather, the  majority of residents  seem  more  concerned  with  how  to take  advantage of tourism.  As  one man  colloquially put  it,  "Tourists are  passive;  cows to be milked. Locals  are  active;  farmers  with milk buckets" (Howell  1997b).

## CONCLUSION

Coming  to a conclusion  about  Leavenworth leaves  us somewhat  uncomfortable,  as it did the  community  development  specialist  who wrote to the town in a  personal letter in  1969:  "Do we  brazenly  announce to the world that Leavenworth  is the Disneyland  of the North-a  make-believe  land  where  all  that  is on the surface  is all there  is-that  this is the new  community  of  unreality?" (Andersen,  1969).  Leavenworth is notable  for its effective  use of  place  identity,  the  speed  with which it was able  to rework  its  built  environment,  and  its sense  for  issues  that  would arise  when

FIG.  7-Flags,  flowers,  and Bavarian  trim on a commercial  building  in Leavenworth, Washington. (Photograph  by Stephen  Frenkel, September  1997)

<!-- image -->

a small  town turned  to tourism  as its main  industry. There  is no  question  that  economically  the town is  doing  better  now than  it did in the  past,  that  there  are  more jobs (though  most are  low  paying),  and  that  tourism is  environmentally more benign  than  is  logging  or fruit  growing.

But when  thinking  about how best to understand  the town, it seems that the most  important  factor,  other  than the Bavarian image  and the fundamental  question of  authenticity, is the  importance  of  shopping.  Indeed,  the most useful  way  to conceptualize  a theme town like Leavenworth is in terms  of its  consumption  component. Although  a number of cultural  geographers have focused on the link between tourism  and a search  for  identity  and/or  have  taken  pot  shots at  the  Disneyesque aspects  of much  urban tourism  (Crang 1996; Johnson 1999),  it is  important to look at theme towns in terms of their  appeal  as  shopping  destinations.  A  place like Leavenworth is neither  a once-in-a-lifetime  trip  nor a transformative trip;  instead,  it  fits  more  closely  into  holiday  and  gift-shopping routines.  In  this  sense,  theme towns such  as  Leavenworth can  best  be understood  as  highly  scripted  outdoor  malls in  interesting  locations.

Criticisms of  American  mall  culture may  also,  then,  be  applicable to Leavenworth as a theme town; namely,  it  appears  fake,  plastic,  and  overly  consumer oriented (Goss 1993, 1999). Many  a resident is locked into  a  low-paying  job  serving  tourists who,  as  Urry  has  argued,  literally  consume  the  place  (1995).  Those  who  live  in Leavenworth find  themselves competing  for  resources with  tourists  on a  daily basis.

Their worlds  frequently  clash, with residents almost  always losing,  or at least deferring,  to  the vested economic  power  of tourist  interests. As a result, Leavenworth is akin to numerous  other tourist  places  that have "become  so overwhelmed  by  visitors that locals  no  longer  feel it is their  place any  more"  (Urry 1995,  166).  Debates about  the  future  are heated,  although  today  the  contest  over  landscape  is  not  so much about its  theming  as about where and how  money  is to be made.  Thirty years of  Bavarian facades have become  an  integral part  of  Leavenworth. The town's lot has been  cast, for better or worse,  for tourism.

## REFERENCES

- Adam, R.  1990.  County  Denies  Williams  Canyon  B&amp;B. Leavenworth Echo, 23 May, ?A,  1.
- Ahrendes,  V.  1996.  Council  Doesn't  Balk  at Goats  Proposal.  Leavenworth Echo,  20  November,  ?A,  3.
- Andersen, D.  1969.  Former  Leavenworth Consultant Appraises Our  Progress. Leavenworth Echo,  28  August,  ?A,  1.
- Ashworth, G.  J., and  B.  Goodall,  eds.  1990.  Marketing Tourism Places. London  and  NewYork: Routledge. Beardsley, S.  1994.  Don't  Sell  Town's Soul for  Tourism.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  9  February,  ?A,  2.
- Beauregard, R.  A.  1998.  Tourism  and  Economic  Development  Policy  in US Urban  Areas.  In The  Economic  Geography of  the  Tourist Industry: A  Supply-Side Analysis, edited  by  D.  Ioannides  and  K.  G. Debbage,  220-234. London  and New York:  Routledge.
- Bell,  D., and G. Valentine.  1997. Consuming  Geographies: We  Are Where  We  Eat. London and New York:  Routledge.
- Beck,  R.  1998.  Vacationers Shop  Around:  Many  Malls  Becoming  Top  Tourist Attractions.  Seattle PostIntelligencer, 3  August,  ?C,  1.
- Booth,  D.  1991.  Things  Remain the Same. Leavenworth Echo, 20 March, ?A,  2.
- Burke,  M.  1995. City  Struggles with  Ways  to Stabilize  Employment,  Provide  Affordable Housing  for Existing  Jobs.  Leavenworth Echo,  14  June,  ?A,  1.
- Chapman-Bellomo,  N.  1994.  Festival  Compromises  Family  Town.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  5  January, ?A,  2.
- Christaller, W.  1963.  Some Considerations  of Tourism  Location in  Europe.  Papers  of  the  Regional Science Association 12:  95-105.
- Christensen-Darling, J. 1995. Hey,  Shopworkers Have  to Park  Too.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  7 June,  ?A,  2.
- Clay,  G.  1980 [1973].  Close-up: How to  Read  the  American City.  Chicago:  University of  Chicago  Press. Cloke,  P.,  and  H. C.  Perkins.  1998. "Cracking the  Canyon  with the  Awesome  Foursome": Representations of Adventure  Tourism  in New Zealand.  Environment and  Planning  D:  Society  and  Space 16  (2):  185-218.
- Conkling,  K.  1982.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  16  June,  ?A,  2.
- Crang,  M.  1996.  Magic  Kingdom  or a  Quixotic Quest  for  Authenticity? Annals  of  Tourism  Research 23 (2): 415-431.
- Craik,  J. 1997.  The Culture  of Tourism.  In  Touring Cultures: Transformations of  Travel and  Theory, edited  by  C.  Rojek and  J.  Urry,  113-136. London and New York: Routledge.
- Crawford, M.  1992.  The  World  in a  Shopping  Mall.  In Variations on  a Theme  Park:  The  NewAmerican City  and the  End  of  Public Space,  edited  by  M.  Sorkin,  3-30.  New  York: Noonday  Press.
- Davis,  J.  1994a.  Ad  Campaign  Unveiled  for Leavenworth. Leavenworth Echo, 21  December,  ?A, 1,  3. 1994b.  You  Can  Help  Market  Leavenworth. Leavenworth Echo,  24  August,  ?A,  2.
- Debbage,  K.  G.,  and P.  Daniels.  1998.  The Tourist  Industry  and Economic  Geography: Missed  Opportunities.  In The  Economic Geography of  the  Tourist Industry: A  Supply-Side Analysis, edited  by D.  Ioannides  and K.  G.  Debbage,  17-30.  London  and  New York: Routledge.
- DeLyser, D.  1999.  Authenticity on the Ground:  Engaging the Past  in a California  Ghost  Town.  Annals of  the  Association of  American  Geographers 89 (4): 602-632.
- Dirkse,  J. 1972.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  26  October,  ?A,  4.
- Eco,  U.  1986.  Travels in  Hyperreality: Essays.  Translated by  W.  Weaver.  San  Diego,  Calif.:  Harcourt Brace  Jovanovich.

- Engler,  M. 1993.  Drive-Thru  History:  Theme  Towns in Iowa.  Landscape 32 (1):  8-18.
- of  Image  Making.  Small  Town,  January-
- .  1994.  Theme Towns:  The Pitfalls  and  Alternatives February, 14-23.
- Gauger,  J. 1995.  Recommitment  to Bavarian  Theme  Urged.  Leavenworth Echo,  31  May,  ?A,  5.
- .  1996. Projekt  Bayern to Resurrect  Bavarian  Theme.  Leavenworth Echo,  19  June,  ?A,  4.
- Goehner, D.  1993.  Designs  on Bavaria: Review  Committee  Seeks Authenticity. Leavenworth Echo,  25  August,  ?A, 1,  8.
- Gold, J.  R., and S.  V.  Ward,  eds.  1994.  Place  Promotion:  The Use  of Publicity and  Marketing  to Sell Towns  and  Regions. Chichester, England,  and New York: Wiley.
1999. Once-upon-a-Time  in the  CommodityWorld: An Unofficial  Guide  to Mall  of  America. Annals  of  the  Association of  American  Geographers 89 (1):  45-75.
- Goss,  J. 1993.  The  Magic  of the  Mall:  An  Analysis of  Form,  Function,  and  Meaning  in the  Contemporary  Retail  Built  Environment. Annals  of  the  Association of  American  Geographers 83  (1):  18-47.
- Gottdiener, M.  1997.  The  Theming ofAmerica: Dreams,  Visions, and  Commercial Spaces. Boulder, Colo.: Westview  Press.
- Gregson,  N. 1995.  And,  Now  It's  All  Consumption?  Progress  in Human  Geography  19 (1): 135-141.
- Hall, C. M., and A. A. Lew,  eds.  1998.  Sustainable  Tourism: A  Geographical Perspective. New York: Longman.
- Heise,  D.  A.,  comp.  1994. Promoting Tourism in RuralAmerica. Rural  Information  Center  Publication Series,  35.  Beltsville,  Md.:  National  Agricultural Library.
- Hannigan,  J. 1998. Fantasy  City:  Pleasure and  Profit  in the  Postmodern Metropolis. London  and New York:  Routledge.
- Herzlich  Willkommen!  1998.  2 June.  [http://www.leavenworthetc.com/eintag.html].
- Hickman,  J. 1994. Learning to  Sleep  in Our  Tourist-Made Beds.  Leavenworth Echo,  2  February, ?A,  10. Hoelscher,  S.  D.  1998a.  Heritage on  Stage: The  Invention of  Ethnic Place  in  America's Little  Switzerland. Madison:  University  of Wisconsin  Press.
- .  1998b. Tourism,  Ethnic  Memory  and the Other-Directed  Place.  Ecumene 5 (4):  369-398.
- Hopkins,  J. 1998. Signs  of the Post-Rural: Marketing  Myths  of a  Symbolic  Countryside.  Geografiska Annaler:  Series  B,  Human  Geography 80  (2):  65-81.
- Howell,  J. 1997a.  Leavenworth Sister  City  Project  Takes  Step  Forward.  Leavenworth Echo,  17  September, ?A, 1,  4.
- .  1997b.  Living  Next Door to a Natural  Disneyland.  Leavenworth Echo,  13  August,  ?A,  2.
- Humphreys,  C.  1998.  Miracle  Town,  USA:  Themes  Bring  Tourist  Dollars  to  Dying  Towns.  ABC  News, 30 July.
- Ioannides,  D.  1995. Strengthening the Ties  between  Tourism  and Economic  Geography: A Theoretical  Agenda. Professional Geographer  47 (1): 49-60.
- Ioannides,  D.,  and  K.  G.  Debbage,  eds.  1998.  The  Economic Geography of  the  Tourist Industry: A  Supply-Side  Analysis.  London and New York: Routledge.
- Jackson, P.  1993.  Towards a Cultural  Politics  of  Consumption.  In  Mapping the  Futures: Local  Cultures, Global  Change,  edited  by  J.  Bird,  B.  Curtis,  T.  Putnam,  G. Robertson,  and L.  Tickner,  207-228. London and New York: Routledge.
- Jackson,  P.,  and N. Thrift.  1995. Geographies  of  Consumption.  In  Acknowledging Consumption: A Review  of  New  Studies, edited  by  D.  Miller,  204-237.  London  and  New  York: Routledge.
- Johnson,  N.  1999. Framing  the Past:  Time,  Space  and the Politics of  Heritage  Tourism  in Ireland. Political  Geography  18  (2): 187-207.
- Jacobs,  J.  M.  1996. Edge  of  Empire: Postcolonialism and the  City.  London  and  New  York,  Routledge.
- Judd,  D.  R.,  and  S.  S.  Fainstein,  eds.  1999.  The  Tourist City. New Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University Press.

Kearns,  G.,  and C.  Philo,  eds.  1993. Selling

Pergamon  Press.

Capital, ford and New York:

- Kinnaird,V., and  D.  Hall,  eds.  1994.  Tourism:A GenderAnalysis. Chichester, England, and  NewYork: Wiley.

Landis,  D.  1993.  Convention  Business  Keeps  Motels  Full.  Leavenworth

.  994a.  Bavarian

?A, 1,  7.

- 1994b. Planning  Starts  for  Marketing  Campaign.  Leavenworth Echo,  lo  August,  ?A,  1,  4.
- 1994c.  Unlike  Leavenworth, Idaho  Bavarian Town  Taps  Government  Aid.  Leavenworth Echo, 9 March, ?A, 1,  5.

Places:  The  City  as Cultural

Past  and  Present.  Ox-

Echo,  23  November,  ?A,  1,  6.

Echo,  2  March,

Village  in  Kellogg,  Idaho,  Builds  on Ski  Resort.  Leavenworth

- Lattimer, S.O.  1995.  Come  On,  Leavenworth, Let's Be  Nice  to  Visitors.  Leavenworth Echo,  o1  May, ?A,  2. LE  [Leavenworth Echo]. 1964.  Valuable  Tourist  Information  Program  Scheduled for Leavenworth June 11.  Leavenworth Echo, 4 June, ?A, 1.
1965.  Leavenworth Goes  Alpine!  Leavenworth Echo, 17  June, ?A,  1.
- .  1966.  Solvang  Danish  Days  Gross  $14,046.05.  Leavenworth Echo, 1 December,  ?A, 4.
- .  1969. This  Is Our  Future  ...  Not a  Plaything  to Discard.  Leavenworth Echo,  o1  April,  ?A,  5.
1972.  Famed German  Woodcarving  Expert  Visits. Leavenworth Echo, 12  October,  ?A, 1.
1975. Proposed  Chamber  Program  Approved.  Leavenworth Echo,  18  December,  ?A,  1.
1976.  Chamber  President Calls for  Unity.  Leavenworth Echo, 29 January, ?A, i.
- 1977a.  Bavarians Decide  on  Four  Trips.  Leavenworth  Echo, o1  February, ?A, 1, 4.
- 1977b.  Happy  Birthday, Dear  Village!  Leavenworth Echo,  13  January, ?A, 1,  3.
1980.  It's Interesting...  But  Do the Locals  Like  It?  Leavenworth Echo,  23  April,  ?A,  1,  2.
1981.  Ad  Group Eyes  Seattle Market. Leavenworth Echo, 1 July,  ?A, 1.
1982.  Echopinion.  Leavenworth  Echo, 2 June, ?A, 2.
- gg99oa. Another  View  of the  Village.  Leavenworth Echo,  14  March,  ?A,  2.
- gg99ob. Solvang  Has  Answer.  Leavenworth Echo,  21  March,  ?A,  2.
- 199oc. What Do You Think of the  Parking  Situation in Leavenworth? Leavenworth Echo, 20  June, ?A, 2.
1993.  Parking Etiquette.  Leavenworth  Echo, 24 February, ?A, 2.
1994. Preserving  Leavenworth's Claim  to Fame.  Leavenworth Echo,  23  February, ?A,  2.
- Leavenworth  Municipal  Code.  1996.  Ch. 18.61: Architectural  Theme. Leavenworth, Wash.:  City  of Leavenworth.
- Lee,  R.  D.  1965.  Solvang  Has  Accomplished  What Leavenworth  Is Now  Starting.  Leavenworth Echo, 19  August,  ?A, 1.
- Lee,  V.  1977.  Letter to the Editor. Leavenworth Echo, 2 June, ?A,  2.
- Liljengren, D.  1998.  Truckin': This  Is  My  True  Confession.  Inkl9,  February. [www.inklg.com/issues\_F /98\_02/streaks/truckin\_nf.html].
- Logan,  J.  R.,  and  H. L.  Molotch.  1987.  Urban  Fortunes: The  Political Economy  of  Place.  Berkeley: University  of California  Press.
- Loney,  T.  1997.  Downtown Charms  Townsfolk,  Tourists  Alike.  Leavenworth Echo,  9 July, ?A, 1,  6.
- Lowenthal,  D.  1985.  The  Past  Is a  Foreign  Country.  Cambridge,  England,  and New York:  Cambridge University  Press.
- Loyacono,  L.  L.  1991.  Travel and Tourism: A  Legislator's Guide.  Denver,  Colo.:  National  Conference  of State  Legislatures.
- Lynch,  C.  1982.  "A  Little  Education" Suggested  as Aid in  Design  Matters.  Leavenworth Echo,  11  August,  ?A,  1.
- MacCannell, D.  1989.  The  Tourist: A New  Theory of  the  Leisure Class. Rev.  ed.  NewYork: Schocken  Books. 1992. Empty  Meeting  Grounds: The  Tourist Papers.  London  and New York: Routledge.
- Mathews,  J. 1972.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  2  November,  ?A,  4.
- .  1974.  Letter to the Editor. Leavenworth Echo, 2  May, ?A,  2.
- Maxham,  S. P.  1991.  City  Growth  Is  Sickening. Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo,  26  November, ?A, 2, 8.
- Miller,  D.,  P.  Jackson, N. Thrift,  B.  Holbrook,  and M. Rowlands.  1998. Shopping, Place  and  Identity. London and New York: Routledge.
- Mowforth,  M.,  and  I.  Munt.  1998.  Tourism and  Sustainability: New Tourism in the  Third  World.  London and New York: Routledge.
- Nash,  D.  1996. Anthropology of  Tourism. Kidlington,  England,  and  Tarrytown, N.Y.:  Pergamon.
- Oakes,  T.  1993.  The  Cultural Space  of  Modernity: Ethnic  Tourism  and  Place  Identity  in China.  Environment and  Planning  D:  Society  and  Space  11  (1): 47-66.
1998.  Tourism and  Modernity in China.  London  and New York: Routledge.
- Pearce, D.  1989.  Tourist Development. 2d  ed.  Harlow,  England:  Longman  Scientific  &amp;  Technical;  New York: Wiley.
- Price,  T.  1997.  Miracle  Town: CreatingAmerica's Bavarian  Village in  Leavenworth, Washington. Edited by  J.  Miller.  Vancouver, Wash.:  Price  &amp;  Rodgers.
- Proceedings  .... 1964. Proceedings: Community  Development  Study.  Summary  Report,  Leavenworth Improvementfor Everyone, LIFE,  1963-65.  University of  Washington  Special  Collections.

- Riise,  H.  1991.  Keep  Bavarian Theme  Alive  in Downtown.  Leavenworth Echo,  26  June,  ?A,  2.
- Basingstoke,  England:
- Rojek,  C.  1993. Ways  of  Escape: Modern  Transformations in Leisure and Travel. Macmillan.
- Rothman,  H. K.  1998.  Devil's  Bargains:  Tourism in the  Twentieth-Century American  West.  Lawrence: University  Press  of Kansas.
- Shields,  R.  1991.  Places  on the  Margin: Alternative Geographies of  Modernity. London  and New York: Routledge.
- Shaw,  G., and A. M. Williams.  1994.  Critical  Issues  in Tourism: A  Geographical Perspective. Oxford, England,  and  Cambridge, Mass.:  B. Blackwell.
- Sinclair, J. 1962a.  Sleepy  Hollow:  Make  Leavenworth Gay  Nineties  Town.  Leavenworth Echo,  1  March, ?A,1.
- .  1962b.  Sleepy  Hollow.  Leavenworth Echo, 8 March, ?A, 1.
- Sorkin,  M.,  ed.  1992.  Variations on a Theme  Park: The  NewAmerican  City  and  the  End  of  Public  Space. New York: Noonday  Press.
- Squire,  S.  1994. Accounting  for Cultural  Meanings: The Interface  between  Geography  and Tourism Studies  Re-examined.  Progress  in Human  Geography  18  (1):  1-16.
- Streur,  P.  1982.  Letter to the Editor. Leavenworth Echo, 11  August,  ?A,  2.
- Sudjic,  D.  1992.  The  loo Mile  City. San  Diego,  Calif.:  Harcourt  Brace.
- Urry,  J. 199o.  The  Tourist Gaze:  Leisure  and Travel in  Contemporary Societies.  London  and  Newbury Park,  Calif.:  Sage  Publications.
1995. Consuming Places.  London  and  New  York: Routledge.
- USTTA  [U.S.  Travel  and Tourism  Administration],  comp.  1994.  Rural  Tourism Handbook:  Selected Case  Studies  and  Development Guide.  Washington, D.C.:  U.S.  Department  of Commerce.
- Walters,  N.  1995. Planning  Commission  Postpones Spinning  Off  Design  Review  Responsibility. Leavenworth Echo,  8  March,  ?A,  1,  3.
- Walton,  J.  R.  1997. Landscapes of Fun:  (Re)Writing Downtown  Syracuse.  Ph.D.  diss.,  Syracuse University.
- Warnek,  O.  V.  1965a.  Alpine  Dweller  Welcomes  Snow  on Roof.  Leavenworth Echo,  5  August,  ?A,  1.
- .  965b.  Former  Bavaria Resident  Writes  about  Leavenworth's Alpine  Plans.  Leavenworth Echo, 29 July,  ?A,  1.
- Waters, S.  1974.  Letter to the Editor. Leavenworth Echo, 2  May,  ?A,  2.
- .  1980.  Letter to the Editor. Leavenworth Echo, 19 June, ?A,  2.
- Williams,  A.  V.,  and  W.  Zelinsky.  1970.  On Some  Patterns  of International  Tourism  Flows.  Economic Geography 46 (4):  549-567.
- Zinser,  C. I.  1995.  Outdoor  Recreation: United  States  National  Parks,  Forests, and Public  Lands.  New York:  John  Wiley.
- Zimmerman,  S.  1997.  Stores'  "Locals" Week  Appreciated.  Letter  to the Editor.  Leavenworth Echo, 2 April,  ?A,  2.
- Zukin,  S.  1991.  Landscapes of  Power: From  Detroit  to  Disney  World. Berkeley: University of California Press.