## American Geographical Society

Female Activity Space in Rural Bangladesh Author(s): Bimal Kanti Paul

Source: Geographical Review, Vol. 82, No. 1 (Jan., 1992), pp. 1-12

Published by: American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215401 .

Accessed: 09/05/2014 00:45

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at . http://www.jstor.org/page/info/about/policies/terms.jsp

.

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

.

<!-- image -->

American Geographical Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## The Geographical  Review

VOLUME 82

January 1992

## FEMALE  ACTIVITY SPACE  IN RURAL  BANGLADESH

## BIMAL  KANTI  PAUL

ABSTRACT. Mobility  and  employment opportunities of women  have  traditionally  been  restricted  in  rural  Bangladesh. As  poverty  increases,  women in  poor families  seek  work  to  support  families.  This  trend  has  resulted  in  expansion of female  activity  space,  after  many  years  of  stability.  This  article  analyzes female space  in  the  context  of  purdah,  the  patriarchal  family  structure,  and  the  spatial organization of  rural settlements. It discusses  ethnic  and  other  differentials  that influence  female  space.  Governmental  and  nongovernmental organizations are urged  to create  additional  employment opportunities for  rural women, so as to expand  further  their  activity  space.

IN  many developing  countries, women  in rural areas usually perform their daily  activities at home or in their own  neighborhoods. Beyond  the  neighborhood  boundary, open  fields, public roads,  and markets are male  space, traversed  by  women  only  on  special  occasions and in  appropriate company or dress. The  presence  of women  in  male  space  is  generally  considered  to be both  provocative  and offensive  (Mernissi 1975).  Evidence  suggests,  however,  that  many  changes  occurred in  gender  relations  throughout  the  developing  world  during  the U.N.  Decade for Women,  from 1976 to  1985,  and that female  space  has  expanded  as a result. Most work  on  this  subject  has dealt with  the  spatial  behavior of urban women  in industrial countries, with little attention  given  to the  spatial  behavior  of rural women  in  developing countries.  This  article examines  the  changing  structure of  female  activity space  in  rural  Bangladesh.  A  holistic  approach  links  female  activity  space with  cultural, social,  political, religious,  and economic  systems.  Unless  otherwise  noted,  the  term  female  space  here  represents  the  space  of  Muslim women.  The  predominant  religion  in  Bangladesh  is  Islam, which  covers 85 percent  of  the  population.  Hindus  account  for  13  percent,  Buddhists  0.61 percent,  and Christians 0.31  percent (BBS  1985, 97).

*  DR. PAUL is an assistant  professor  of  geography at Kansas State  University,  Manhattan, Kansas 66506.

Copyright  ? 1992  by  the American  Geographical  Society of  New  York

NUMBER 1

Until  recently,  the  mobility  and  employment opportunities  of rural  women in  Bangladesh  have been limited both  spatially  and  functionally.  However, women  are now  increasingly  forced to seek  employment  outside the homestead to  support  their  families.  Age-old  norms  segregating  and  protecting women  have  been  broken  during  the  last two  decades  (World  Bank 1990, 1).  This  pattern  has  resulted  in  the  areal  expansion  of  the  female  activity space,  which  had  been  severely  restricted  by  tradition  (Greeley  1983, 42; Khandker 1987, 93).  After  providing  background,  this  article discusses  differentials of  female  activity  space  in  rural  Bangladesh, analyzes  the  recent changes  in the extent of female  space  at the national level,  and offers some policy  recommendations.

## BACKGROUND

The extent  of  female  space  in  rural  Bangladesh  is  closely  linked  to the purdah, which is  deeply  rooted in Islamic doctrines. The word  literally  means curtain or  veil,  and  the  practice epitomizes  the  exclusion  of  women  from public  male  space  and  their  seclusion  in  the  home  compound,  which  is surrounded and shielded  by  houses,  foliage,  and  fencing  (Feldman  and McCarthy 1983,  949;  Chen  1986,  217).  Purdah is often one of several instruments of  patriarchal  family  structure that enable men to dominate women  in rural Bangladesh (Cain, Khanam, and Nahar  1979, 1).  Men  usually  exert  power and  authority  over  women,  because the  former control  property,  income, and women's  labor,  and because husbands  generally  are five to fifteen  years older than  their  wives.  Purdah and  patriarchal family  structure have  produced a  rigid  division  of labor  by gender  and a  system  of social stratification that makes women  extremely  dependent  on  husbands  and  places  them  at extreme  risk when  husbands  prove  unreliable  or withdraw  support.  The women's  apparent  insurance  against  such  potential  risks  is  children,  especially  sons,  the  birth  of  whom  confers  some  status and  autonomy  on  a young  woman  (Chen  1986, 217-218).

To understand the extent of sex-based  activity space  in rural  Bangladesh, it is  necessary  to have  knowledge  of the  spatial organization  of rural settlements.  Their  primary  unit  is  a  bari,  which  generally  consists  of  two  to six houses around a  square  or  rectangular courtyard.  The residents of a bari are in most instances divided  into households  living  in  separate  houses that are used  for  sleeping,  storage,  and  cooking.  If a household  has  cattle, there  is likely  to be a shed in the outer  courtyard  (Fig. 1).  There  may  also be a kitchen garden  accessible to the bari without  exposure  to the outside world. A household  usually  consists of a nuclear  family  and  represents  the  primary  economic unit,  being  the locus of  production  and  consumption.  All the residents of a bari are members  of  a  patrilinear family.  Most  daily  activities  of  married women  and  young  unmarried  girls  are confined  to a bari.

Women  perform  a wide  variety  of  jobs  and  activities  to  maintain  the family.  However,  the  existent  social  system  dictates that women  specialize

<!-- image -->

## 1. House 2.  Cattle  shed 3.  Kitchen 4.  Kitchen  garden

FIc.  1-Rural settlement in  Bangladesh.

only  in the tasks that can be  performed  in or near a bari.  They  fetch water, clean  houses,  cook and serve  meals,  wash  dishes  and  utensils,  and care for the children. Other tasks for women  are  tending  of livestock,  raising poultry, preparing  and  storing  foodstuffs, and  growing  vegetables.  In  nonagricultural communities  women  do other work: in  fishing  communities,  for  example,

they  weave and  repair  nets,  prepare drying  racks,  and  protect  the catch from birds. Men are  primarily responsible  for the fieldwork related to  production and for all other activities  requiring  social interaction outside the homestead. Irrespective  of  occupation,  men also  participate  in some  farmyard  and homestead-based activities  such  as  feeding  and  raising  cattle.  Similarly,  women sometimes  work with  husbands  in  the  nearby  fields to harvest  pulses  and mustard or at  ponds  to clean  jute.  Until  recently,  however,  those were  rare exceptions,  where  labor-intensive,  location-specific  tasks  required poor  families  to use the  labor of both  sexes  (Greeley  1983, 40).

The  next-highest  rural  settlement unit is the  para,  or  neighborhood,  which is intermediate between  the bari where  an individual  lives  and the  village in  which  it  is  located.  A  neighborhood is  a  cluster  of  adjacent  baris,  the formation of which  is  usually  conditioned  by occupational, religious,  social, or  topographical  factors  (Bertocci 1975, 353).  Several  neighborhoods,  which are  physically  detached from each other  by cropland,  wasteland,  or woods, together  form a  village.  Small  villages  often  comprise only  one  neighborhood. In some  villages  there  may  be a  post  office, schools,  or  shops,  generally  at the  junction  of two or more roads.  Beyond  the  village  are  weekly  or  biweekly markets  (hats),  where  men  do all the  shopping  for household  items and the principal selling  of a household's  agricultural  and  nonagricultural produce.

People living  in a  neighborhood  are  generally  related,  and a  majority  of them have the same basic  occupation,  whether in  agriculture, fishing,  weaving,  or  pottery.  The  pattern  holds  true with  respect  to  religion  and  caste, especially  in Hindu-dominated areas. Sometimes households  from one  patrilinear  kinship  group  cluster in  one  neighborhood  of a  village.  Women  are usually  allowed  to  visit  other  homesteads  in  the  neighborhood without wearing  a veil. Because few families in a  neighborhood  own  a well  or  pond, most  women  must  go  to  the  site  of  one  to  obtain  potable  water  for their households  and to bathe and wash clothes.  They  also  occasionally  visit other homesteads to borrow or return  goods.  The sheltered  paths connecting neighborhood baris are used  for these  visits.  Movement  of women  beyond  their own  neighborhood  is  rarely required  and is not  permitted  unless  they  wear a  burkah, which  is a loose  garment  that covers the  body  from crown  to toe, or  carry  an  umbrella to shield  them  from the  gaze  of men  along  the  way. However,  only  the  wealthy  can afford to have  burkahs, so an alternative is for most  women  to  cover their  heads  with  a sari  arranged  like  a burkah. Women of  prosperous  families often travel in curtained  carriages.  Thus the activity space  of most women  in rural  Bangladesh  extends to the  boundary of their  neighborhood.  Male  space  covers a broader area, encompassing  the boundaries of their own  and  nearby villages.

## DIFFERENTIALS IN  FEMALE  SPACE

Although  the  neighborhood  boundary generally  determines  the  extent of female  space  in  rural  Bangladesh,  the area  may vary  in size  according  to

a woman's  economic  status,  age,  and  religion,  as well  as the  geographical location and size  of the  neighborhood  (Fig. 2).  Women  from different economic classes are  subject  to varied  types  and  degrees  of  patriarchal  control. The  poorer  the  family,  the  more  egalitarian  the  relationships  and  responsibilities between  the sexes. The social  prescription  of  purdah  is least  rigidly followed  by  women  of the  poorest  families  (Feldman 1983,  1894),  which  need women's  involvement  in  income-producing  activities.  Women  of  landless and  land-poor  families  thus  often  work  outside  their  neighborhoods.  The female  space  of women  of  poor-to-very-poor  families  may  include their own and  adjacent neighborhoods.

Wealthy families,  which  have  enough  land and other income sources to provide  food and other necessities  year-round,  do not need the labor of the women  for survival and can afford the costs  implicit  in their strict seclusion. Indeed, they employ  women  of  poor families, mainly  widows  and divorcees, to  perform  work  that  involves breaking  the  norms  of  purdah.  The  hired laborers  wash  clothes,  carry  water,  and husk rice,  tasks not  usually performed by  women  of so-called  high-status  families for reasons of honor. Purdah thus symbolizes  the  social status of  rural families  and  bolsters class differences among  them  (Abdullah  and Zeidenstein  1982, 56).  The nature of their work means that women  of  relatively  affluent families need not leave their homesteads. With decreased familial  wealth,  the  range  of female  space expands; likewise  with  increased  wealth,  the  range  contracts. This  relationship  contrasts  markedly  with the situation in Western countries:  there affluent women have more  mobility  and hence  a  larger activity space  than do  poor  women. Obviously,  wives  of  village religious  leaders also maintain strict  purdah  and stay  within  their homestead  compounds.

The  status  and  position  of  women change  at different  points  in  their life  cycles,  which may  broadly  be  divided  into  two  stages:  the  orientation stage  in  the  parental home,  and the  procreation stage  in  the  affinal home. Marriage  is the nexus between these  stages.  Before  marriage,  girls pass through infancy,  childhood,  and adolescence in the  parental  home.  They usually  are secluded there between  menarche and  marriage.  Notions  of  purity  and morality  underlie this restriction on  spatial  movement.  After  marriage,  women acquire  new  roles  as  daughter-in-law,  mother,  mother-in-law,  and  grandmother. Because of the  large  differences in  age  between  husbands and wives, many  mothers-in-law and  grandmothers  are widows. Mothers-in-law in  joint families  supervise  and direct the  work and social relations of other female family  members,  especially  young  wives  and  adolescent  daughters.  With advancing age,  the demands for  purdah diminish,  and female members are allowed more  open physical  movement  in the  neighborhood  as well as some outside it.  Elderly women,  especially  widows,  have the most  autonomy  and mobility  in  their  own neighborhoods  and  in  adjacent  ones.  Their  activity space  often  exceeds the  boundary  of overall female  space.

The  space  of  a  young  wife,  in  contrast, falls  short  of  the  boundary  of

<!-- image -->

1.  Space of women of rich  and  religious families/young wives.
2.  Overall  female space.
3.  Space of  elderly/Hindu/poor women.
4.  Male  space/space of tribal women.

Ban boundary Neighborhood  boundary Village  boundary

-

...........

FIG. 2-Schematic representation of  female  space  in  Bangladesh.

overall  female space.  The  mobility of  a new wife  is  severely restricted  even within the  homestead compound. In  the  first  year of  marriage, she  is  not allowed to  visit  other  homesteads without an  older  female escort  from  the husband's family. She  is  rarely  sent  to  bring  water  or to  borrow  goods  from nearby homesteads. She  must  bathe  in  the  pond or  river  only when most men  are at work  in the fields.  Nearly  the  same  is true for unmarried  adolescent girls:  they  may  fetch  water,  bathe,  and  do  many other  tasks,  but  they  must be  accompanied by  friends of  their age  or  by  younger siblings.

The  activity  space  of  Hindu  women,  who  do  not  practice purdah,  encompasses  a  larger  area than  overall female  space.  Hindu  female  space  includes  the  women's  own  neighborhood,  plus  a  part  or all  of  the  adjacent neighborhoods.  It thus  more  or less  corresponds  to  the  space  of  the  nonHindu  very  poor  women  or those  of  older  ages.  Irrespective  of  economic status,  age,  and  religion,  female  space  often  extends  to  adjacent neighborhoods  if  two  or  more  of  them  are close  together  or  are  homogeneous in kinship  and other social criteria  (Cain, Khanam, and Nahar  1979, 32). This is  also  true  for  women who  live near  the boundary  of  two adjacent neighborhoods.

The  pattern  contrasts  sharply among  women  of tribes,  which  account for almost 1  percent  of the total  population.  The  activity space  of these women is  larger  than  that  of  the  poorest  nontribal  women,  because  tribal  society does not restrict women's  movements  outside  their homesteads.  The tribal groups  are  concentrated  in  the  southeastern  and  northern  hilly  areas of Bangladesh  and on the  plains  of North  Bengal.  Unlike  the vast  majority  of women  in  Bangladesh,  the tribal women  have a dominant role in all  aspects of life.  They  work  both  at home  and in  the  fields and are involved,  as are men,  in  marketing  of  agricultural produce.  Female  participation  in  all economic  spheres  in  tribal  society  has  been  induced  by  the  harsh realities of pressing  socioeconomic  problems.  Male and female  spaces  of the tribal  groups are similar to male  space  in the rest of  Bangladesh.

The size of female  space  varies  regionally  in  Bangladesh,  as the districts of the  country  differ from each other in economic condition and in  practice of  purdah.  Noakhali  and  Chittagong  are considered the  most  conservative districts,  and  the  female  activity  space  there  should  be  smaller  than  the overall  female  space.  The  opposite  is  true  for  Bogra, usually  considered  a nonconservative  district. The  range  of  local female  activity  space may  also be at variance with  the size of overall female  space  because of the  proximity and the  accessibility  of the  neighborhood  to urban centers.  Generally,  female space  for women  who live in urban  fringe  areas  should be  larger  than overall female  space.  Persons in  such  neighborhoods  are  relatively  less strict about observing  purdah  than are those  in rural areas.

## RECENT  CHANGES IN  FEMALE  SPACE

The  employment  opportunities  traditionally  available  to  rural women were as  paid  labor in other  households,  preferably  in the same  neighborhood. Paid labor is defined  here to include  both  agricultural  and  nonagricultural tasks  performed  for cash or kind. The  type  of work  performed  as  paid  labor is  essentially  household  related  (Table I).  Although  paid  labor is  still  the largest  source  of  female  employment in  rural  Bangladesh,  the  number  of women  seeking  wage  employment  is  increasing.  The chief  distinction  between paid  labor  and  wage  labor  is  that  the  former  is  restricted to  the household  compound,  while  the  latter is not.  Because  wage-labor employ-

ment involves  greater  movement  from home,  it is reasonable to contend that female  space  in  rural  Bangladesh  has been  expanding.

One  way  to  support  this assertion is to adduce national-level information on  the  absolute  size  of  the  female  civilian  labor force in  rural  Bangladesh for two  or more consecutive  censuses.  Unfortunately,  the definition  of this segment  of  the  labor force  has  varied  in  Bangladeshi  censuses.  The  1961 census,  for  example,  defined  the  female  civilian  labor force as  comprising women  ten  years  of  age  or  older  who  were  gainfully  employed or  were seeking  work. In  1974, by  contrast, female  children  below  ten  years  of  age but above  five  years  who  claimed to have  worked  for  wage  or  profit  were included  in  the  civilian  labor force  (Census  Commission  1975, 148).

TABLE  I-EMPLOYMENT AND  ACTIVITY  SPACE  OF  RURAL  WOMEN

|                                         | ACTIVITY SPACE   | ACTIVITY SPACE   |
|-----------------------------------------|------------------|------------------|
| EMPLOYMENT/TASK                         | Neighborhood     | Elsewhere        |
| Traditional paid labor                  |                  |                  |
| General housework                       | X                |                  |
| Paddy husking and processing            | X                |                  |
| Food processing                         | X                |                  |
| Grinding                                | X                |                  |
| Feeding cattlea                         | X                |                  |
| Raising other livestock and poultrya    | X                |                  |
| Craft manufacture                       | X                |                  |
| Quilting                                | X                |                  |
| Recent wage labor                       |                  |                  |
| Carrying paddy                          |                  | X                |
| Gleaning grain                          |                  | X                |
| Tending cattle                          |                  | X                |
| Weeding, planting, and harvesting crops |                  | X                |
| Stripping jute                          |                  | X                |
| Excavation and construction             |                  | X                |

Despite  the  definitional  problems,  the available labor-force data  suggest that more women  have been  employed  or  looking  for work in recent  years than in the  early  1970s. The 1983-84  survey  of the labor force  (BBS  1985,  77) showed that the absolute size of the female  portion  increased  by  half a million persons  during  the  1974-1981 intercensal  period  and  by  0.8 million  from 1981 to  1984. These trends cannot be  explained  merely  by  the  expansion  of the absolute number of the rural  female  population aged  ten or above  (Census Commission  1975, 111, 135;  BBS  1985).  Moreover, the  average  annual increase in  the  absolute  size  of  the  female  civilian  labor force was  much  higher  in the  1981-1984  period  than in the  1974-1981  period.

Empirical  studies  in  rural Bangladesh during  the  past  decade or earlier suggest  that  women's activity  space  has  been  expanding  (Abdullah  and Zeidenstein  1982, 24; Chen  1983, 70; Feldman and  McCarthy 1983;  Greeley 1983, 43; Chen  1986, 220; Aziz  1990, 3). According  to these  studies,  women have been seen  working  in the fields alone or  alongside  men;  participating

in  weeding,  transplanting,  and  harvesting  of  crops; carrying  harvest  from the  fields;  and  tending  cattle  (Safilios-Rothschild  and Mahmud  1989). They also  work  at  public-sector  construction  sites  (World  Bank  1990, 30).  More and more women  have also been observed  begging. By contrast,  in  previous years  all work  outside  the  homestead,  other  than  begging,  had  been  done by  men.

## EXPANSION OF  FEMALE  ACTIVITY SPACE

Several  independent but  mutually  correlated factors have  forced rural women  to seek both  paid  and  wage  labor outside their homes  or  neighborhoods.  Bangladesh  is now  undergoing  rapid  socioeconomic  change  marked by  increased rates of rural landlessness  and  impoverishment.  The  country has one  of the  highest  population  growth  rates in  the  world;  that  growth, in  turn, slashed the  average  area of cultivable land  per  rural  household,  from 1.21 hectares in  1961 to  approximately  0.61 hectare in  1981  (BBS  1985, 255). Available  evidence  further  suggests  that  the  proportion  of  landless  rural households  rose from 18  percent  in  1960 to 33  percent  in  1977 and to  nearly 45  percent  in  1983-84  (BBS 1973, 12; BBS 1985, 205).  In  contrast with  and complementing  the  growing  numbers of  land-poor  and landless families is an increased concentration of  landholdings.  In the  1960s, 17  percent  of farm households  controlled 50  percent  of the cultivated land  (BBS  1973, 12).  The latest national-level  survey  of  landownership  recorded that in  1977, 11  percent  of  the  households  owned  more  than  50  percent  of  the  land  (Jannuzi and  Peach  1980). Disparities  between  landowners  and  landless  probably heightened  during  the  1980s,  as households  continued  to  grow.

In the  absence  of  land,  most  poor  households  depend  entirely  on  agricultural  wages  for subsistence. This has  generated  an abundant  pool  of labor and has caused  wages  to  drop,  even as inflation has boosted the cost of  living. Consequently,  wage  incomes of the male members of landless families have proved  insufficient  for  subsistence,  and women  in  such families  are forced to  leave  their  homes  in  search of  employment. One  field  survey  of  eight Bangladeshi villages  concluded  that  dependency  of landless households  on female  wage  labor  had  risen  (Greeley  1983, 46).  Additionally,  women  in families  owning  a little land must work their own  fields, because the families cannot afford hired male labor.

With increased  poverty  in  rural  Bangladesh,  the traditional  family-support systems  are  changing  (World  Bank  1990, 9).  Under the norms of  patriarchy,  when  a woman  loses her husband  through death, divorce, separation, or  abandonment,  her in-laws,  adult  children, or  parental family  should  support  her. In the face of economic  pressures,  this  support increasingly  is not forthcoming.  The  incidence  of  divorce  and  desertion  has  risen  as  poverty has  advanced  (Chowdhury  and Jahan 1984; Chen  1986, 219).  Whereas the number of divorced males  consistently  decreased in the  past  three censuses, the number of divorced females  consistently  increased. A similar trend also emerges  when  the  numbers  are  expressed  as a  percentage  of total married

persons. Marriage  instability apparently  is  highest among  the  poorest  households  (Miranda 1980).  The number of widows  also increased  during  the last two  decades  (BBS  1985, 90),  even  as the  number  of widowers  decreased.

The  rising  incidence  of  divorce  and  widowhood among  rural women clearly points  to an  increase in  the  number  of  female-headed  households. Traditionally,  most widowed  and destitute women  in  lower  socioeconomic classes  sought  paid-labor opportunities  in  other  households  of  their  own neighborhoods.  Few, if  any, sought wage  labor. As their numbers have risen, however,  they  have  recently begun  to seek both  paid  and  wage  labor.  Married women  of other  age groups, previously  outside the rural labor market, have become  its main  participants  in  recent  years (Ahmed  1987, 30).  The  age  at which  women  have  begun  working  outside the home  has become  younger and  younger.  A  survey  of  two  hundred  female  laborers in  four  areas of Bangladesh  found  that 23  percent  were  under  25  years  of  age;  43  percent were  between  26 and 40  years  of  age;  and  the  remaining  34  percent  were more than 40  years  old  (Feldman  and  McCarthy 1983, 956).  Some 60  percent were married at the time of the  survey;  13  percent  were divorced or  separated; 27  percent  were  widowed.

These data all  imply  that increased  landlessness,  poverty, escalating prices, inflation,  weakened  male  obligations  to  support  women,  and  rapid  increase in number of households headed  by  women have contributed to new  patterns of  activity  for rural  women,  specifically  those of  poor  families. This shift has led  to  the  expansion  of  female  space  in  recent  years.  As  the  World Bank (1990, 708) observed,  "Social norms  of  'proper'  behavior  are no  longer  restricting  women  from  entering  employment."  Many  nongovernmental  organizations,  multilateral and bilateral aid  agencies,  local  voluntary  organizations,  and  Bangladeshi  ministries  have  economic  and social  programs  for rural  women,  most  of  whom  have  been  influenced  in  some  way.  These organizations  also  provide employment  opportunities  for rural women.  For example,  the  Population  Control and  Family Planning  Division  of the Ministry  of  Health  and  Population  Control  employed  11,533 rural women  as family-planning  workers in  1985  (BBS 1989, 564).  These workers visit  rural houses to deliver  contraceptive  devices and advice.  They  travel  through  fields, on dirt or  paved  roads,  and across rivers-activities that extend female  space in  rural  Bangladesh.

Nonetheless, several factors  have constrained  employment  of rural  women. The Islamic revival  movement,  which  has  swept  across the  Muslim  world, strongly  advocates seclusion of women  in the bari  compounds  (Ahamed  and Nazneen  1990,807).  Other  constraints  on women's  employment  have stemmed from certain  developmental  interventions.  Capital-intensive  investments  in the  textile  industry  in  recent  years  have  displaced  rural women  from employment  in  handloom  crafts  (Chen  1986, 222). Expanded  use  of  rice-processing  machines  in  the  wake  of the  green  revolution  also  displaced many poor  rural women  from tasks in other households.  According  to an official

estimate,  the  rapid growth  of mechanized  milling  in  Bangladesh displaced 3.5 to  5 million  days  of  female  labor  annually.  In  1984, most  of  the  11,000 rice mills  in  the  country  were  using  electric- or  diesel-powered  rice hullers (Ahmed 1985, 29).  Yet  green-revolution  technology  has also enhanced  wageemployment  opportunities  for women  from landless and  land-poor  households  in  transplanting,  weeding,  and  harvesting  the  paddy  (Ahmed  1985). It is  thus  difficult to estimate  the  net  effect of  green-revolution  technology on women's  agricultural employment.

## CLOSING COMMENTS

The  perimeter  of female  space  in  rural  Bangladesh  has been  expanding in  recent  years,  as  a  consequence  of  socioeconomic  changes  related to  increasing  landlessness  and  impoverishment.  However,  rising poverty  is not affecting  all  rural women equally.  Women  from  the  poor  and  very  poor classes face a  greater  threat to their survival than do women  of rich families. As a  result,  the  expansion  of female  space  is not uniform across  socioeconomic classes. Yet the overall female  space  has  expanded,  as  poor  women  constitute the  overwhelming  majority  of  the  rural families.  Usually,  the  standard of living  rises when  activity space  also  expands. Unfortunately,  this  relationship has not  emerged  in rural  Bangladesh.

Many  more women  now seek access to a labor market that has  long  been dominated  by  males. In such a  situation,  public policies  should  be devised to facilitate women's  entry  into the  wage-labor  market. Such  policies  should not be  designed  exclusively  for the  poor  women,  whose  behavior has little influence  on  others,  but must also include  women  from rich families,  who set  the  standards for the  village.  Additionally,  governmental  and other organizations  involved  in  rural  development  should  continue  to  support  existent  projects  aimed at  improving  the conditions  of rural women.  Without further  expansion  of  their  space, living  conditions  will  continue  to  deteriorate. There is  also the  need  to  create new  employment  opportunities  for rural women.

## REFERENCES

- Abdullah,  T. A.,  and  S. A. Zeidenstein. 1982. Village  women  of  Bangladesh:  Prospects  for  change. Oxford:  Pergamon  Press.
- Ahamed,  E., and  D.  R.  J.  A.  Nazneen. 1990. Islam  in  Bangladesh:  Revivalism or  power  politics? Asian  Survey  30:795-808.
- Ahmed,  I. 1987. Technology, production linkages and  women's employment in  South  Asia.  International  Labour  Review 126:21-40.
- Ahmed,  Q. K.  1985.  Female  employment in  Bangladesh:  A review  of status and  policy.  UN  decade for  women 1976-1985:  Situation  of  women in  Bangladesh, 19-64.  Dhaka:  Ministry of  Social Welfare  and  Women's  Affairs.

Aziz,  S. M. 1990. Status of  Muslim  women  in  Bangladesh.  South Asia Forum  3(2):1-4.

1985. 1984-85  statistical  yearbook  of  Bangladesh. Dhaka:  Ministry  of  Planning, Statistics Division.
2. BBS  (Bangladesh Bureau  of  Statistics). 1973. 1973  yearbook of  Bangladesh agriculture. Dhaka: Ministry  of  Planning, Statistics  Division.
3. .1989. 1989  statistical  yearbook of  Bangladesh. Dhaka:  Ministry of  Planning, Statistics Division. 一.

Bertocci, P.  1975.  Microregion,  market area and Muslim  community  in rural  Bangladesh.  Bangladesh Development  Studies 3:349-366.

Cain,  M.,  S. R. Khanam,  and  S. Nahar. 1979. Class  patriarchy  and  women's  work  in  Bangladesh. Population  and  Development  Review 5:405-438.

Census  Commission. 1975. Bangladesh  population  census,  1974. Dhaka:  Ministry  of Home  Affairs. Chen,  M. 1983. Quiet  revolution: Women  in  transition  in  rural  Bangladesh.  Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman.

. 1986. Poverty,  gender, and  work  in  Bangladesh.  Economic  and Political  Weekly  21:217-222. Chowdhury,  N.,  and R. Jahan. 1984.  Identification  of  priority  research issues  on women  in  Bangladesh.  Kuala  Lumpur: APDC/SAREC  Conference.

Feldman,  S. 1983.  Use  of  private  health  care  providers  in rural  Bangladesh:  A  response  to  Claquin. Social Science and Medicine 17:1887-1896.

Feldman,  S.,  and  F. E.  McCarthy. 1983. Purdah  and  changing patterns  of  social  control  among rural women  in  Bangladesh.  Journal  of Marriage  and the  Family  45:949-959.

Greeley,  M. 1983. Patriarchy  and  poverty:  A  Bangladesh  case  study.  South  Asia Research  3:101-112. Jannuzi,  F. T.,  and  J.  T. Peach. 1980. Agrarian  structure  of  Bangladesh:  An  impediment to  development.  Boulder,  Colo.: Westview  Press.

Khandker, S. R.  1987.  Women's role in household productive  activities  and  fertility  in  Bangladesh. Journal  of  Economic  Development  12:87-115.

Mernissi,  F.  1975.  Beyond  the veil: Male-female dynamics  in a modern  Muslim  society.  Cambridge, Mass.: Schenkman.

Miranda,  A. 1980. Nuptiality in  Bangladesh.  DERAP  publication 95.  Bergen.

World  Bank. 1990. Bangladesh:  Strategies  for  enhancing the  role  of  women in  economic development.  Washington, D.C.

Safilios-Rothschild, C., and  S. Mahmud. 1989. Women's  roles  in  agriculture-present trends  and potential  for  growth.  Dhaka: UNDP  and  UNIFEM.