<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Model of Urban Tourism for Small Caribbean Islands

Author(s): David B. Weaver

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 83, No. 2 (Apr., 1993), pp. 134-140

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215251

Accessed: 12-11-2015 12:31 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## MODEL  OF URBAN  TOURISM  FOR  SMALL CARIBBEAN  ISLANDS

## DAVID  B. WEAVER

ABSTRACT. In  the mature phase, urban tourism on  small Caribbean islands is characterized  by  decreasing levels  of  tourist  activity  beyond a  specialized commercial zone  adjacent  to  cruise-ship  docks.  Exceptions  include  isolated  attractions and accommodations  beyond  a  specialized tourist  zone  and beach-focused  resort strips adjacent  to the  city.  The model  depicts  five  zones:  specialized tourist  zone, the  central  business  district,  local  neighborhoods, the  resort  strip,  and  the  rural periphery.

APID urbanization and the  emergence  of tourism as the  dominant  regional  economic  activity  were  two  significant  trends  during  the  past thirty  years  for the  Caribbean islands.  The  proportion  of  population that was urban rose from 36.5  percent  in  1960 to an estimated 57.5  percent in  1990. The urban  average  annual  growth  rate was 3  percent,  far in excess of the rural rate of 0.7  percent (Hope  1989).  Expansion  of the tourism sector was  even  more dramatic: the  number  of  international  stayover  tourists to the  islands rose 8  percent annually,  from  approximately  960,000  in  1959 to 10,166,000  in  1989  (Caribbean  Tourist Association  1960;  World Tourism Organization  1990).  The  number  of  cruise-ship  excursionists  increased  from 808,000 to 6,532,000 (World  Tourism  Organization  1990).

This article focuses on tourism to the small Caribbean  islands, which  are defined as ones with a  population  of less than 400,000.  The  patterns  of urban and tourism  development  on  these  islands differ from those  found  on  the larger,  more  populated  islands, and a distinct small-island urban tourism has emerged.  The  purpose  of this article is to  provide  a model  of that tourism. The  empirical  evidence  on which  the  model  is based came from St. John's, Antigua;  Nassau,  Bahamas;  Bridgetown,  Barbados;  Roseau, Dominica;  Castries,  St.  Lucia;  Plymouth,  Montserrat;  St.  George's,  Grenada;  and  Kingstown, St. Vincent.

On the  small  islands,  the  main  centers are accessible to  most  stayover tourists.  These  centers  range  in  metropolitan  population  from  about  five thousand in  Plymouth  to almost one hundred thousand in  Bridgetown  and in  Fort-de-France,  Martinique. They possess  a broad  array  of functions  and facilities  that  is  disproportionate  to  urban  size.  Nevertheless, the  overall volume of  activity  and the  physical space  in which  it occurs are constrained. The  potential  for tourist-local interaction is enhanced,  and tourism assumes a  high  profile  both  physically  and  economically,  even  when  the actual volume  of  the  visitation  is  not  high.  The  principal  centers  are  always  ports,

*  DR. WEAVER is  an  associate  professor  of  geography at  Luther  College, University of Regina,  Regina,  Saskatchewan,  Canada S4S OA2.

Copyright  ? 1993  by  the American  Geographical  Society of  New  York

which  indicates the  importance  of  cruise-ship  activity  as a factor in  determining  the  geographical patterns.

As with  the status of each island's urban center, the status of the tourism sector in  general  is  exaggerated by  the limitations of  setting  and the  economy. International tourism  receipts  account  for  approximately  one-third  of  the cumulative  gross  national  product (GNP)  of the small islands. Relative tourism contributions to the individual  economies  in the  group range  from less than  10  percent  of the  GNP  for  Guadeloupe  and  Martinique  to more than 60  percent  for  Anguilla,  Antigua,  and  the  British  Virgin  Islands  (World Tourism  Organization 1990).  Absolute numbers of arrivals that  appear  modest  may  mask  very  high  host-tourist  ratios because  of  the  small  resident populations  on  the  islands.  In both  social and  economic  terms,  tourism  is likely  to  act,  directly  and  indirectly,  as a  pervasive  force on  a small island.

The  contemporary  dominance of tourism is not  surprising  when  patterns of historical  development  and limited  resource endowment  are considered. The small Caribbean islands were  initially  colonized  as  specialized agricultural  peripheries,  with  plantation  economies  to  supply  western  European powers  with  tropical products.  After World War II, the  regional  potential for beach-based tourism became more  apparent (Anglo-American  Caribbean Commission  1945).  Labor and  capital  were  increasingly  diverted  from the chronically  depressed  agricultural  sector to tourism. The resort hotel  gradually  replaced  the  plantation  as  the  primary  mode  of  production  in  an economy  still  organized  by  the  principles  of  the  plantation  monoculture (Harrigan 1974;  Hills and  Lundgren 1977).  That transformation did not occur uniformly  throughout  the small-island  group.  Destinations such as  Antigua display  much  greater  reliance on  plantation  tourism than does  Dominica,  at the  other  end  of  the  spectrum,  which emphasizes  locally  controlled,  dispersed,  small-scale  accommodations  and  so-called  ecotourism  attractions (Weaver 1988, 1991).

Most of  the  small  islands  have  an  elite  coastal  strip,  where  the  resort hotels and estate houses are  located,  and a local  interior,  which lacks lucrative economic  activity  but  contains  the  labor reservoir that  serves  the  tourism sector  (Weaver 1988).  The dominant  city port  is an undifferentiated node in this  dichotomy  because of scale. A more detailed  analysis  would  depict  the principal  port city  as an  area rather than  a node  and  would  focus  on  the patterns  that characterize the  port  in  the  pretourism stage  of  development and that  emerge  in the context of a mature tourism  industry.  Such a model is  presented  in  the  balance of this article.

## PRETOURISM PHASE

The term  pretourism  does not mean  the absence of tourism or tourists; instead,  it  identifies  the  lack  of  an  autonomous,  economically  important tourism sector that fosters its own  specialized  structures and  landscapes  on a  significant  scale. In this  sense,  pretourism  is similar to the  exploration  and

early  involvement stages  of  the  resort-cycle  model  (Butler 1980), during which  a  place provides  few  if  any  tourist-oriented facilities or attractions to a small number of visitors. The tourism  industry  in Caribbean  ports during this  phase  is  not  readily  visible;  it  is  largely  subsumed  in  the  nontourist landscape  of the  plantation economy.  The most visible indication and  likely the  only  specialized  expression  of  tourist  traffic is  the  presence  of  some accommodations  ranging  in  scale from  a  prestigious  hotel  for  high-status visitors  to  small  guesthouses for  budget  travelers. Most  if  not  all  accommodations are located in  the  main  port,  with  the  large  and  popular  hotels situated on the  principal thoroughfare  in the central business district  (CBD); guest  houses  are on back streets or in residential  neighborhoods.

The concentration of  facilities  in  the  CBD results from  several  factors, including  the  preference  of tourists to be in a location where a  comprehensive array  of services is  apt  to be available. Also,  the main  port  was accessible in the  preaviation  era,  when  ship  travel was  the  only  way  to reach an island destination.  Finally,  because the  typical  traveler in the  pretourism stage  was not  seeking  beach activities, beachfront locations were not  preferable  to the CBD for hotel sites.

Despite  the  presence  of  a  modest  array  of  accommodations,  the  early pretourism  port  does  not  contain  a  well-defined  tourism  area. However, modifications occur as the  number  of tourists  begins  to increase. The most visible  change  entails  the  appearance  of  an accommodation-entertainment zone  along  a  main  artery leading  from  the  port.  Such  a zone  during  the 1960s in the northern suburbs of St.  John's  consisted of several small hotels and  nightclubs catering  to  persons  to whom  a beach was less  important  than cost and  proximity  to the  city.  A  similar zone  exists in  Roseau,  Dominica. Another  change  that  may appear  is the occasional influx of tourists into the CBD that results from the arrival of cruise  ships.  This  may  foster the  modification of retail services and attractions for this new  clientele.

## MODEL  OF MATURE-PHASE  URBAN TOURISM

Although  the  landscape  of a  developed  tourist destination  in the  Caribbean is dominated  by  coastal resorts, tourism is also  important  in the main port city. Cruise-ship  excursionists are  predictable  arrivals, and  stayovers  in nearby  beach resorts  patronize  facilities and services available in  the  dominant urban centers. The activities of these  tourists  effectively  partition  the port  city  into  four  distinct  zones,  as  well  as  a  rural  periphery,  that  are represented  in a model  of tourism zonation  (Fig. 1).

The  emergence  of a  specialized  tourist zone  (area  1 on  Fig. 1)  is associated more  with  the  growth  of  the  cruise-ship  arrivals than  with  the  stayover sector. With  a  significant  increase  in  excursionist  traffic, specialized  retail services arise in  areas of the  CBD  adjacent  to the  point  of  disembarkation. Through  new  construction  and  gradual  transformation and  restoration of existing buildings,  a  portion  of the CBD,  likely along  a main street,  becomes

FIG. 1-Model of  urban  tourism  space.

<!-- image -->

established as a tourist district where  imported duty-free goods,  local handicrafts and  souvenirs  (which  in  fact  may  be  imported  as local  wages  rise), restaurants, and  other  specialized  goods  and  services  are  provided  to  the growing  tourist traffic  (area  lb  on  Fig.  1).  The Redcliffe and  Heritage Quay district of central St.  John's,  developed  during  the  1980s,  is an  example  of a specialized  tourist zone.

To create a  positive  tourism  experience,  such areas  emphasize pedestrian convenience  and  safety by limiting  vehicular access and  by providing  good sign  directions,  lighting,  litter removal,  and  police  services. Courteous sales personnel  are well  prepared  to  accept foreign  currencies and  charge  cards, and  musicians  and  vendors  are  allowed  to  circulate  among  the  restored buildings  to  give  an  aura of  authenticity.  Except  for such  tourism-related employees  and elements  of the local elite and middle  class, the tourist does not  encounter  a  cross  section  of  the  local  population.  Beggars  and  other undesirable elements  are dissuaded  by  the  police presence.

Given  these  characteristics,  this  part  of  the  specialized  tourist  zone  is morphologically  similar to the  recreational business  district  (Stansfield  and Rickert  1970), except  that the  main  attraction is  shopping,  not  an  adjacent beach or waterfall. Some attractions, such as historic  buildings,  and accommodations add functional  diversity  to the  zone.  As visitation  increases, the principal  dock is  eventually  expanded  and  improved  to handle  additional cruise-ship  visits,  and  freighters  are  sometimes  diverted  to  other  docks distant from the tourist zone. In some instances, restricted  shopping  facilities that  form  an  exclusive  tourism  zone  are  established  at  the  dock  for  the convenience  of  cruise-ship  excursionists who  do not want  to clear customs or enter the  port city (area  la  on  Fig. 1).

On the  landward side,  the  specialized  tourist zone  abuts the  CBD (area 2 on  Fig. 1).  As the  frequency  of tourist visits  generally  decreases  with distance from the  specialized  zone,  it  is  meaningful  to  distinguish  between  a transitional  CBD  (area 2a),  which  caters to  both  tourists and  locals,  and  a  peripheral  CBD  (area  2b),  which  almost  exclusively  serves locals. This distancedecay pattern  derives from several considerations about mass tourists.  They may  prefer  to walk  only  short distances because  of  the  physical  hardship associated with  the  enervating  effects of the climate;  they may prefer  to  stay in  areas where  they  will  encounter  desirable  shops  or attractions;  and  they perceive  areas with  a  large  number  of  locals as difficult or  threatening.  By contrast,  hardy  and adventurous tourists are  apt  to wander farther  afield into the  peripheral  CBD to  partake  of  sights  and  experiences  that are  thought  to be authentic.

Two  exceptions  interrupt  this  distance-decay  pattern.  The  CBD often contains structures of historic  importance  that draw tourists who  would  not otherwise  venture outside the  specialized  zone.  These structures, which  are accessible  by  taxi and  by walking,  represent  a matrix of isolated attractions that define an  emergent  tourist-historic  city (Ashworth  and  Tunbridge 1990).

The other  exception  is the  presence  of small hotels and  guesthouses  that are locally  owned  and cater to  regional  and  budget  stayovers.

The broad  array  of services and facilities available in the transitional CBD attracts both  tourists  and  a  cross section  of  the  local  population  from  the entire island. No  part  of an island witnesses as much contact between tourists and  locals who  are not  involved  in  tourism  as does  the  transitional CBD. This contact can lead to cross-cultural  conflicts, as when  tourists are  thought to be  disrespectful  because of  inappropriate  dress and  photograph-taking,  or when  tourists  perceive  local vendors  and drivers as  overly  aggressive.  Morphologically,  the  transitional CBD is  intriguing  for its combination  of local and tourist-oriented characteristics.  The latter are  represented by  store  signs and  fronts  denoting  the  availability  of  tourist-oriented  goods  such  as  film and  postcards.  The local element,  best  represented  in the  peripheral  CBD, is associated with  features such as a lack of sidewalks and street  signs,  confused traffic  circulation, residential  units,  and street vendors  selling  lottery  tickets and  candy.

Beyond  the CBD is the local residential area  (area  3 on  Fig. 1). Quality  of housing  and economic  well-being  increase with  distance from the  CBD, in a  pattern morphologically  similar to  Anglo-American  cities  (Clarke 1974). An  important implication  for tourism is that visitors  straying beyond  a CBD may unintentionally  enter the  poorest  and most  dangerous  local  neighborhoods.  This  is  less  likely  to  occur where  physical  barriers divide  the  two spaces,  as does the  recreational  ground  on  the  southwestern  side of central St.  John's  or the  limestone  ridge separating  the Nassau CBD from the  aptly named Over-the-Hill residential  neighborhood;  these barriers,  however,  may also exacerbate the sense of alienation between  the two areas.  As in the CBD, the  distance-decay  relationship  is  disrupted  by  attractions that,  because of distance,  unfamiliarity,  and  perception  of  danger,  are accessible  mainly  by vehicle. A  scattering  of small hotels and  guesthouses  caters  mainly  to  regional visitors who resemble the local  population  or adventurers who  again perceive the  area to  be  more  authentic  than  the  tourist  zone.  For  most  tourists, however,  the local  neighborhoods  are terra  incognita  and are best avoided.

It is  increasingly  difficult in  the  confines  of a small Caribbean island to define  the  limits  of  urban  space. Sharp  urban-rural divides  are seldom  encountered, and the transitional urban shadow extends  deeply  into the  densely populated  rural areas and  along  coastlines.  The  emergence  of  resort zones or  strips (area  4 on  Fig. 1)  along  beachfronts  adjacent  to the  port  is  important in  identifying  the urban tourism area. These  strips  are often  contiguous  with and  functionally  linked  to the  built-up  urban area. On  some  islands  these strips  extend a  long  distance from the  port,  as on Barbados  and  Antigua.  On some  less-developed  islands,  such  as  Montserrat,  nearby  residential tourist estates can  arguably  be included  as this  type  of extension  of the urban area.

The resort  strip,  like  the  specialized  tourist  zone,  is  oriented  almost exclusively  to  tourism,  although  many  characteristics  of the two areas are  very

different. For  example,  the  strip  is  oriented  to accommodations  and  beach activities  chiefly  for  stayover  visitors;  the zone  is retail and historic,  focused on  serving  excursionists.  High-density,  low-rise resort hotels  (area  4a on  Fig. 1)  tend to  occupy  the  high-rent  beachfront, while  roadfront and inland sites (area  4b on  Fig.  1)  farther from the  shore are  occupied  by  condominiums, apartments,  services,  smaller  hotels,  and  single-unit estates for  residential tourists,  expatriates,  and local elites.

A  final  component  of  urban  tourism  space  that  is  not  represented  on Figure  1 is the network of arterial  roads  that connect the CBD  with the  airport and the  resorts. Like the  transitional  CBD, these  shared  spaces  are utilized by  both tourists and locals. Because these corridors  pass through  residential and  other  types  of  local  areas,  they  provide  the  tourist  with  a  low-risk opportunity  to see local  landscapes  and to formulate  impressions  about the areas that  may  dictate  subsequent  visitation  patterns  in the  city.

## CONCLUSION

The model  of  urban tourism  space presented  here  generalizes  patterns as  they  evolved  over time in the dominant urban centers of small Caribbean islands. The model  suggests  the  growing  role and  visibility  of tourism as it expands economically.  The model is  depicted  as a series of concentric circles that indicate  declining  tourism  influence  with  distance from a  specialized tourist zone close to the  point  of disembarkation.  Exceptions  to this distancedecay  pattern  include  the  resort  strips  along  the  coast,  as  well  as  nodal attractions and accommodations in the main urban area.

## REFERENCES

- Anglo-American Caribbean Commission. 1945.  Caribbean tourist trade: a  regional  approach.  WashD.C.
- Butler,  R. 1980. Concept of  a  tourist  area  cycle of  evolution: implications for  management of resources.  Canadian  Geographer 24:5-12.
- ington, Ashworth,  G., and  J. Tunbridge. 1990. Tourist-historic  city.  New  York: John  Wiley  &amp; Sons.
- Caribbean  Tourist Association. 1960. Review  of  member  states.  New  York.
- Clarke,  C. G. 1974. Urbanization  in  the  Caribbean.  Geography  59:223-232.
- Hills,  T.,  and  J. Lundgren. 1977. Impact  of  tourism  in  the  Caribbean:  a  methodological study. Annals  of  Tourism  Research  4:248-267.
- Harrigan,  N. 1974. Legacy  of  Caribbean  history  and  tourism.  Annals  of  Tourism  Research  2:13-25.
- Hope,  K. R. 1989. Internal  migration  and  urbanization  in  the  Caribbean.  Canadian  Journal  of  Latin American and Caribbean Studies 14:5-21.
- Stansfield,  C., and  J.  Rickert. 1970. Recreational  business  district.  Annals  of  Tourism  Research  4:213225.
- .1991. Alternative to  mass tourism  in  Dominica.  Annals  of  Tourism  Research  18:414-432. World Tourism  Organization. 1990. Compendium  of tourism  statistics  1985-1989.  Madrid.
- Weaver,  D.  B. 1988. Evolution of  a  "plantation"  tourism  landscape on  the  Caribbean  island  of Antigua.  Tijdschrift  voor Economische  en Sociale  Geografie  79:319-331.