<!-- image -->

## American Geographical Society

Fruticulture and Uneven Development in Northeast Brazil

Author(s): Cesar N. Caviedes and Keith D. Muller

Source:

Geographical Review, Vol. 84, No. 4 (Oct., 1994), pp. 380-393

Published by:

American Geographical Society

Stable URL:

http://www.jstor.org/stable/215754

Accessed: 05-02-2016 04:05 UTC

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms &amp; Conditions of Use, available at http://www.jstor.org/page/ info/about/policies/terms.jsp

JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

<!-- image -->

Wiley and American Geographical Society are collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Geographical Review.

http://www.jstor.org

## FRUTICULTURE AND  UNEVEN  DEVELOPMENT IN NORTHEAST BRAZIL*

## CESAR  N.  CAVIEDES  and  KEITH  D.  MULLER

ABSTRACT. Baixo  Aqu  is an extensive  irrigation  project in Northeast  Brazil. The original  goal  of the project, located  in an area of chronic  drought,  was to provide irrigation  that would  improve  the  economic  condition  of traditional  cultivators. Nevertheless, Baixo  Aqu  has become  a showcase  of the  dilemmas  that economic development may  bring  to  a  depressed rural  environment. Although export enterprises  thrive  and promote  progress,  small farmers maintain  their traditional farming  practices  and  are not  incorporated  into  the  new  production  system.

pRODUCTION of fruit for export is a rapidly expanding, prominent, and profitable agricultural sector in  Latin America. By volume  and  value, export of fruit from some countries is displacing traditional agricultural commodities  such as coffee, cacao, bananas, pineapples,  and grains. For example,  melons  from Mexico are systematically  routed to North  American markets; grapes, peaches, and plums from Chile find their way to European and  North  American  markets during  the  northern  winter;  and  pears and apples constitute valuable exports from Argentina. This export activity functions only  on a rigorous technological basis: sound water management with scientific dosages of nutrients, intensive  land utilization, stringent pest-control standards, suitable infrastructure for rapid transport of the  products to seaports,  and  aggressive  marketing  strategies. Under  these  circumstances only  modernized  systems  of fruit production result in  the financial capital necessary  to  sustain  the  levels  of  quality  and  volume  that  international demand requires. Concurrently, traditional forms of fruit production mostly for domestic consumption  increasingly lag economically and sometimes  are replaced by the larger export-oriented producers.

Although  Brazil still  trails Mexico,  Chile,  and  Argentina,  it  has  made rapid inroads into  this  new  boom to become a major Latin American fruit exporter. Northeast  Brazil is a leading  center of  the  boom,  specifically the irrigated portion of the Sao Francisco Valley, where  grapes and melons  are grown  for export (Bicalho and Hoeffle  1990). This article analyzes  the  conditions under which  land there is irrigated and its production incorporated into  the  export system  at high  levels  of efficiency and modernization.

The project is located along the lower ASu Valley in Rio Grande do Norte State in  the  northern portion of the arid Northeast. Distinct contrasts have

* Research was funded  by a grant to Dr. Caviedes  from the Tropical Conservation  and Development Program,  University of  Florida.  Dr. Muller  was  a Fulbright  Fellow  at the  Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do  Norte  in  1992.

*  DR. CAVIEDES  is  a  professor of  geography at  the University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611. DR.  MULLER is an  assistant professor of  geography at Kent  State  University, Trumbull Campus, Warren, Ohio 44483.

Copyright C) 1994 by the American  Geographical  Society of New  York

emerged  between  the  middle  and  lower  reaches of  the  Asu  River. In  the portion  that  lies  upstream  from  the  dam,  poverty  and  deprivation  have worsened  the  conditions  under  which  backcountry (sertdo)  dwellers  have been living.  Below the dam conditions are diametrically different: irrigation has brought about modernization of agricultural practices and specialization in the contemporary global agrarian  economy. The duality of two so different environments  in  such  close  proximity  exacerbates the  social distances that modern agriculture creates whenever  it is superimposed on traditional  agrar- ian  communities.

Though  generally  welcomed  by  regional authorities, this  development project has elicited bitter response from some social activists who  decry the allotment  of  land  irrigated by  governmental  projects to commercial enterprises. The activists contend  that the  project betrays the  original  purposes of  waterworks  that were  supposedly  designed  as catalysts to  alleviate  the hardships of subsistence agriculturalists during recurring drought. This raging  controversy  centers  on  the  following question:  should  the  goals  for development  in  Northeast  Brazil focus  on  agricultural modernization  that renders a more vertically  integrated and thus  a more internationally  competitive  economy,  or should emphasis be on use of water from public works by small farmers to increase their basic food productivity and to rescue them from chronic deprivation and underdevelopment?

Defenders  and detractors of these  positions  frequently collide  in public forums  (Grossmann  1987). The  ensuing  discussions  coincide  with  similar debates concerning who  profits most from the fruit-export boom in Mexico, Chile, or Argentina: the rural  populace or the large entrepreneurs. This article contributes to the ongoing  examination of capital-peasantry relationships in Latin America. The study centers on the lower ASu Valley, a region that has been  rapidly inserted  into  the  world  economy  through  the  export of agricultural commodities  that require careful management. Moreover, the water and  soil  resources  of  the  region  require scientific  approaches and  proper agricultural management.

## PROJECT  BEGINNINGS

The northern segment  of Rio Grande do Norte is a part of the infamous "drought  polygon"  of  Northeast  Brazil. At  quasi-periodical  intervals  the summer  rains fail, and  under  the  mostly  cloudless  equatorial skies  evaporation reaches levels  that greatly surpass accumulated water reserves. Both biotic  resources  and  human  activities  suffer  the  consequences  of  intense drought. In response to a situation originally perceived as dictated by adverse climatic conditions, the Brazilian  government  in 1909  created the Inspectoria de Obras Contra as Secas (IOCS), which  in  1963 became the Departamento Nacional de Obras Contra as Secas (DNOCS) [National Department of Works against  Drought].  Controlled  by  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior, the  DNOCS has the specific duty of planning  and coordinating national efforts to combat

Fic.  1-Lower ASu Valley,  Rio Grande do  Norte,  Northeast  Brazil.

<!-- image -->

droughts and  to  control  damaging floods  in  Northeast Brazil.  Its  early  strategies included the  construction of  artificial  roadside  ponds for  basic  water needs in  rural  communities. The  department also helped to  build large reservoirs in  upper  catchment areas  and  to  dam  some  crucial  watercourses to provide  for irrigation  of  cotton,  sugarcane,  beans,  and  rice,  items  that were considered essential to  maintain the  region's  agrarian  foundations. No  provisions were  made  to  diversify the  rural  economy. It  was  thought that  the newly managed  water  would enhance both  large-scale  and  small-scale production (DNOCS  1984).

In  1975 the  lower  part of  the  Aqu  River, also  known  as  the  Piranhas River, was targeted as a dam-construction area. The dam would  regulate the water  for  irrigation  of  an  approximately  55-by-4-kilometer  alluvial  plain located between  Highway  304 and the river's mouth (Fig. 1). The impoundment of water behind  the dam would  inundate an area of deciduous thorny woodland  (caatinga)  and superficial soils on which  goat herding, subsistence farming, and carnauba exploitation were the dominant activities of the dispersed population.  Even before the dam's construction, the project encountered intense  opposition  from peasants living  upstream from the dam, who were to be relocated to a newly  built town, Nova Sao Rafael,  on the margins of the dammed lake.

During  construction of the  dam in  1981, the  partial collapse of its dirtand-rock wall  ignited  a new  phase of opposition.  If the structure collapsed without  water, what  might  happen  once  the  dam was  finished  and a lake had formed? Thus, frightened peasants downstream fled from the floodplain and erected shacks on the bare caatinga, where they remain. Because of that defiance, authorities withheld  technical and social assistance from these peasants, certainly an issue that keeps both groups antagonistically opposed.

The Armando Ribeiro  Gonqalves  Dam was completed in  1983. The lake covers 19,100  hectares, and 270 families have been relocated from the flooded portions of Sao Rafael to the new  settlement, Nova Sao Rafael. Downstream from the dam, 10,362  hectares of alluvial land have been irrigated,  especially in  the  rural municipality  of  Ipanguacu. With  the  exception  of  a  concrete canal designed  to divert water to the reservoir Acude Pataxos, no additional water-distributing works were built. The peasants are expected to build the necessary  canals and  ditches  to divert  the  regulated waters from the  river into  their  lots. Thus  much  of  the  water distribution  is left  to the  initiative of the  Baixo ASu's traditional farmers. Governmental assistance that would help  the  peasants  living  downstream  from  the  dam  to  utilize  the  newly harnessed resource is generally lacking. Moreover, another agrarian  interest group has appeared in the area: the modernized  corporate fruit companies.

## ARRIVAL OF  FRUIT  COMPANIES

In  the  early  1980s Brazilian, Japanese, and  American  corporations discovered the advantages of commercial cultivation of fruit on irrigated  sections of the middle  Sao Francisco Valley that lie in the center of the northeastern drought  polygon.  Rich alluvial  soils,  dry  air, and  year-long  insolation  are natural resources basic to the development  of grape and melon  cultivation. Relatively easy access to the main highways  that link the northeastern coastal cities and the populous centers farther south is also an advantage. Following this  example,  other  irrigated sites  in  the  drought  polygon,  such  as  near Mossoro in  the  Apodi  Valley  40 kilometers  west  of  Baixo AVu, were  also chosen  by fruit-producing entrepreneurs.

In  1966, after serving  as a volunteer  in  the  U.S. Peace Corps, David  E. Knoll rented a few  hectares in  Aqu  to grow  tomatoes, with  sharecroppers. By the mid-1970s his operations had enlarged substantially. He established Agroknoll  near the  town  of  Aqu  with  the  purpose  of  producing  melons, bananas, onions, mangoes, and tomatoes with water from modern irrigation pumps. By 1992 his holdings  had expanded to 750 hectares of prime alluvial land, which demonstrated the enormous potential for commercial agriculture in  the  valley.  Such  success  attracted other  entrepreneurs,  especially  after completion  of the dam. They were drawn to the lower A,u  Valley by both a secure supply of water and the high rate of insolation and potentially good soils. They were  also attracted by the optimal dryness of the air, the accessibility  to  a  main  road connecting  with  the  port  of  Natal  240 kilometers eastward, and the abundant labor force.

In 1987 Frunorte (Frutas  do Nordeste) became another highly  organized fruit-producing and -exporting enterprise, with  its cultivated fields on  the left  bank of the  Aqu  River. Other companies  that are more diversified but less productive than Agroknoll and Frunorte include Finobrasa  and Pereira da Silva. Finobrasa specializes in  the  cultivation  of cotton, rice, maize,  and mangoes; Pereira da Silva, only  in cotton and mangoes. In addition to these companies,  which  mostly engage  in fruit production, the cotton-producing company Algodoeira Sao Miguel takes advantage of the irrigation offered by the dam.

Idle land  on  the  floodplain  that was  not  already exploited  by  the  local peasants  was  purchased  by  the  fruit  entrepreneurs.  Not  long  after  their arrival, however,  they  discovered  that  the  alluvial  soils  had  two  serious limiting factors:  extreme salinization after  periodical irrigation,  and nematode plagues in waterlogged locations. Thus only  in isolated cases have entrepreneurs  dislodged  traditional agriculturalists from  their  properties.  Instead, companies  have  chosen  to  occupy  the  unutilized  interspaces between  the stands of carnaubas that dot the lower valley.

Today the rural landscape of the lower  Aqu  Valley is still dominated by the traditional lineal settlements, which stretch mostly from the town of ASu to Carnaubais and Pendencias and have formed along the roads that parallel the  river. Each property extends  from the  river in  narrow lots, whose  dimensions  typically are thirty to fifty meters wide and one kilometer or more long.  This system  allows  relatively equal distribution of river frontage and various soil types  for each lot.

## ALTERATION OF  LAND-TENURE PATTERNS

Social activists contend that the Baixo  ASu project  operates for the benefit of the large fruit-producing enterprises and exacerbates  the poverty of small cultivators. This  contention  assumes  that  the  enterprises  grow  in  size  by seizing  or evicting  small farmers from the best land in the valley. However, according to  a  survey  (Gomes  da Silva  1992), between  1975 and  1985 the

number of small proprietors with  prime agricultural land did not decrease; their numbers actually increased in the two municipalities of the lower valley, IpanguaSu and ASu. The average size  of  minifundia,  which  are properties of fewer than 20 hectares, remained almost identical in the years before and after construction  of  the  dam.  That survey  also  reveals  that in  Ipanguaqu rural holdings  smaller than 100 hectares increased remarkably in both number and size. However,  holdings  of more than 200 hectares grew minimally despite  the  potential afforded by  large-scale irrigation in the valley.

In the municipality of  Aqu  minifundia have remained almost unchanged in  number  and area, although  holdings  between  21 and  100 hectares have experienced the largest increase. Properties classified as large, more than 100 hectares, have  not  proliferated, as is often  asserted. From 1975 to  1985 superenterprises rose in number from five to nine  and expanded in size from 11,579 to 24,454 hectares.

These patterns raise several conflicting questions about alteration of land tenure as being detrimental to small proprietors. Why has their number not diminished  if  their  land  is,  as alleged,  the  most  desired by  the  large commercial enterprises? Also,  if  large  consortia promote  the  concentration  of landownership,  would  not  the  number  of  large  properties  in  the  valley expand at the expense  of small ones? An answer to the first question is that pauperization  forces the  farmers to subdivide  their minimal  holdings  into still smaller units, which assures them some form of subsistence. Conversely, the  growing  number  of  smallholdings  could  suggest  that  there  is  greater economic  opportunity  even  on  reduced units, a situation that did not exist in the  past.

Concerning the second question, it becomes evident that increased water availability in the valley has led to the expansion of latifundia onto properties not previously  agriculturally integrated. This expansion  is accompanied by a definite  increase in the number of midsized  holdings,  precisely those that can be effectively  managed in fruit production.

Another  response  to these  questions  is that the  commercial fruit enterprises  have  formed  mutual  production  systems  with  small  proprietors by enhancing  the sharecropping practices. Some Brazilian agrarian economists (Prado 1987;  Ramos de Souza 1987; Gomes da Silva 1992) have argued that sharecropping  is  another  expression  of  rural servitude  in  Northeast  Brazil that reveals persistent facets of a feudal social relationship. In the  Aqu  Valley sharecropping  would  serve  most  ideally  in  the  areas designated  for vegetables,  staples,  and  cotton.  By  no  means  does  this  emphasis  suggest  that sharecropping is linked  to the  flourishing  activities of the  commercial fruit enterprises. Instead, their activity assumes an advanced, technological character that is incompatible  with  smallholder production.

The increase of midsized  holdings  without  a substantial decrease in the numbers  of  small  or  large  holdings  is  a  clear indication  that  the  former specializing  in  fruit production  have  not  increased at the expense  of other

FIG.  2-View of  an  unirrigated  vineyard  thriving  near  AWu.  (Photograph  by authors)

<!-- image -->

holdings.  The midsized  holdings  have  incorporated new  lands to enhance the  formerly  underutilized  fruit  growing.  This  interpretation  is  important in  explaining  the successful character  of commercial fruit  production in Baixo A~u.

## CHARACTERISTICS OF  COMMERCIAL FRUIT  PRODUCTION

:~~ ~ ~~~~K The cases of Frunorte and Agroknoll  in A~ju  reveal the basic differences between  the  traditional  agricultural practices in  the  valley  and  large-scale commercial fruit  production.  Both companies  implement  centralized management,  a situation  in  which  the  owners  themselves  closely  oversee  the operations and are actively engaged  in  marketing. Frunorte focuses on melons  and  grapes  for  international  and  domestic  markets.  In  addition,  the company is expanding experimental production of mangoes, pineapples, and acerolas to meet the demands of international markets. Nurseries and greenhouses  are maintained  by  agricultural experts,  who  are  usually  trained at universities  in  S-ao  Paulo State. Periodically  the  company  sends  its  agronomists abroad to Spain, Chile, Israel, or the United  States to stay informed of the  latest innovations  in  biological  engineering,  cultivation,  and  irriation techniques.  This  practice assists  the  company  in  adopting  the  most  novel fruit varieties and  farming techniques,  which  include  optimal  utilization of the  terrain located almost  exclusively  on  rich, unirrigated  reddish  latosols above the  floodplain  (Fig. 2).

FIG.  3-The pumping  stations  and canal are part of the technology installed  by commercial  fruit producers  on  their  properties.  (Photograph  by authors)

<!-- image -->

The scientific approach to fruit production applied  early by these  companies  reveals that the  humid  eutrophic soils on  the  floodplain are oversaturated and tend to salinize after being plowed. Also, the common nematode is  difficult to  eradicate under  continued  humid  conditions  associated with irrigation (Oliveira  1988). In contrast, the  reddish  latosols of  the  tabuleiros, which  slope  gently  from the valley  sides to the  floodplain,  have  abundant mineral nutrients and exhibit optimal drainage conditions. These conditions permit selected irrigation and pest control, and the soils have  a mixture of sands and silts that allows  mechanical tilling  without  apparent signs of soil deterioration. Moreover, the  use of artificial fertilizers is limited  to applications  of  nitrates of  calcium,  potassium,  and  ammonia,  which  often  suffice for three harvests of melons  and two  harvests of grapes annually.

Buried drip-irrigation lines minimize  the water losses that are associated with  sprinkling and allow for the simultaneous application of fertilizers and water. Most of the  irrigation technology  and machinery  employed  by Frunorte and by Agroknoll  have  been imported from Israel. The water supply is  secured  by  pumping  stations,  such  as the  one  at Fazenda Agua  Grande (Fig. 3). The companies  build  their stations for water distribution  on  their properties because public canals or other waterworks are lacking.

Melons are the  main  commodity  at Frunorte, accounting for 72 percent of the total hectarage, because productivity  at 15 tons a hectare annually  is high and melon-packing facilities for export are effective. Without disclosing

actual returns, agronomists at Frunorte estimate that the yearly income generated per unit of area  in melons is seven times greater  than that of sugarcane and nine  times greater than that of cotton.

Melons are  selected by size. European  and North American markets  prefer smaller sizes weighing  up to one kilogram each, but Brazilian  markets prefer one-and-a-half-kilogram melons.  Frunorte and  Agroknoll  use  similar procedures:  melons are  placed manually into cardboard  boxes to prevent damage. The  filled  cartons are usually  transported by  truck to  Natal for export  to Belgium, The Netherlands, Denmark, or the United Kingdom, but some are destined  for southern  Brazil. Penetration of  North  American markets has been  limited  by competition  from Mexico and Chile.

Harvest, selection,  packing, transportation, and overseas shipping  must be coordinated to assure that the products are not overripe and do not suffer damage before reaching consumers. Any delay in the process can be costly. The number of boxes to be purchased by foreign wholesalers is contracted well  in advance, usually one year before delivery, and the fruit company  is liable  if  it  does  not  deliver.  Therefore, it is  crucial that transportation and port facilities be fully  synchronized,  a situation that is not always achieved. The facilities at Natal, the closest ocean port to the  Aqu  Valley, have  been plagued  by  bureaucratic inefficiency,  labor slowdowns,  and continual  oversedimentation from the Potengi River. For these reasons the port facilities at  Cabedelo,  which  is  near  Joao Pessoa,  often  handle  produce  from  Aqu despite  the  additional  time  and  transportation cost that the  370-kilometer distance entails.

Production at Frunorte and  Agroknoll  depends  heavily  on  specialized labor to  meet  delivery  deadlines.  Of  crucial importance  is  the  personnel employed  in  water dosage,  pest  control, fruit selection,  and  packaging. In times of great activity Frunorte  employs 2,000  workers, a figure that decreases to  1,000 during  the  slow  periods. Agroknoll,  a smaller enterprise, employs 700 workers during the harvest season and nearly 400 during the off-season, which  extends  for nearly seven  months.  Aqu  has approximately 22,000 inhabitants,  and  evidently  these  two  companies  employ  a large number  of Baixo  Aqu  Valley  dwellers,  an  indication  that  the  firms support  the  rural economy  of  Aqu  municipality.

## UNDERDEVELOPMENT ABOVE  THE  DAM

The original plans  for the  Armando  Ribeiro  Gonqalves  Dam contained provisions for relocating and retraining the pastoral-subsistence agricultural populations  whose  dwellings  and  fields were  to  be  inundated  by  the  reservoir. The retraining emphasized  livelihood  alternatives other than pastoralism  and  subsistence  agriculture. Authorities  asserted that  the  displaced families  would  receive  the  basic necessities  such  as a  dwelling,  land,  and farming equipment  to begin  anew  in the resettlement areas.

Almost  8,000 Sao Rafael village  dwellers  were  assured that  their  new houses  in  Nova  Sao Rafael would  provide  the  amenities  of  modern  urban

FIG.  4-The new  settlement  of Nova  Sio  Rafael. Note  the abundance  of vacant lots.  (Photograph by  authors)

<!-- image -->

life.  That  promise was  realized to  some  degree, and  the  village has  become an  active  semiurban  center  on  the  lakeshore  (Fig. 4).  A  replica  of  the  old church of S-ao  Rafael was even erected in the new  settlement. Less fortunate than  residents  of  Nova  S-ao  Rafael were  the  families  who  lived  upstream from the dam on the dry margins of the middle  Aqu  River. Their livelihood consisted  mostly  of  goat  herding,  subsistence  bean-and-maize  agriculture, and  exploitation  of the numerous  items such as nuts, wood,  fiber, and wax obtained from carnaubas.  Promised that  they would be established in grouped farms and provided  with  adequate governmental  assistance, they  were  provisionally  installed  in  pressed-wood  shacks  and  given  small  lots  of  land located far from the  newly  established lakeshore. Even now  these areas are mostly  barren lithosols amid which  granitic outcrops emerge continually,  so that  only  in a few  places  does  semiorganic colluvium accumulate.  The  original vegetation  of this  upstream segment  is a xerophytic caatinga extremely  degraded by  centuries  of  goat  herding.  The  deforestation caused  by  the  numerous brick- and  tile-manufacturing  establishments  that are spread along the middle course of the A~u River also results in environmental  degradation.

Obviously,  under these circumstances the  populations  that occupied the valley  floor before construction of the dam lost most from the environmental alterations. Their livelihood  as  goat herders, small  agriculturalists,  and carnauba processors  all but disappeared. Also, the living  conditions in the hastily erected shacks have  markedly  deteriorated, in  contrast with  previous  residences,  all because the  federal and state governments  have  failed to fulfill

FIG. 5-Traditional methods  prevail  in the  areas of minifundia in  Baixo  AWu. Water for domestic use  is  still  distributed  on  the  backs  of  donkeys.  (Photograph  by  authors)

<!-- image -->

their  promises of  assistance. With  justifiable  reason,  the  most  bitter  criticisms of  the  dam's construction  reflect concerns  about  the  unsatisfactory living conditions  of  the  upstream  dwellers.  Although  inhabitants  of  S-ao  Rafael went to a new town and some small holdings  have increased in value because of their potential  access to  regulated water, the  peasants of the middle valley are now  confined to a harsher environment  with  less prospect of improved living  conditions  (Fig. 5).

The level  of  popular  dissatisfaction  perceived  by  the  state  government elicited  a  response  in  1988 through  planning  for a  project entitled  Sert-ao Novo.  The  project considered  granting  so-called  irrigation  kits for farmers who  had up to three hectares on the  AWu River margins. Each kit contained a  gasoline  or electrical motor  pump,  water-distribution hoses, and payment for the construction of small canals. All farmers with  holdings  in areas with good  soils and  ready access to river water were  eligible  to  participate  in the project (Aranha  1991). In  1992, when  we  conducted  a  thorough  survey  of the  middle  and  lower  AWu  Valley,  we  saw  only  a handful  of  people  who were  benefiting  from this  project.

Other  social and  economic  emergencies  have  seemingly  forced the  diversion  of  governmental  funds  that were  to be utilized  in the Sert-ao  Novo project  to other crucial social services. Thus the  rural situation has not  significantly changed  and may have worsened from that of the early years  after construction of the dam.

## CATALYST FOR  AGRICULTURAL MODERNIZATION

A central consideration  in  the  strategies of rural planners  and agrarian economists  for harnessing  a regional potential for commercial fruit production  is  the  guarantee  of  skilled  agricultural labor. Only  this  premise  can assure increased productivity and improved income for rural workers. This strategy necessarily requires the participation of private investors, who  will become  involved  only  when  guaranteed that their  operations will  not  be subjected to  the  vagaries  of  governmental  bureaucracies. Of  primary importance is that water be available and distributed by official agencies, if not free  of  charge, then  at a nominal  fee.  The  involvement  of  government  is required only  to this extent.

Irrigation works  constructed  with  public  funds,  whose  expenditure  is justified as a means to reduce poverty, meet the water demands of agricultural entrepreneurs. Only  at a certain point will  these entrepreneurs be forced to pay  for  the  water  they  use.  With  low  levels  of  agricultural production, poverty-stricken  farmers are neglected,  because they  are unable  to pay for the water when  the projects  are completed. Also, subsistence agriculture  does not fit into the development  scheme. In macroeconomic terms it makes more sense  to  allocate the  resource to dynamic  agribusiness  than  to subsistence cultivators. However,  the question  concerning the social relevance of these decisions  triggers a debate  precisely  at this  ideological  point  (Graziano da

Silva  1989).

When  fruit-growing  entrepreneurs  move  into  a conveniently  irrigated area, it is not always true that they take the best land from peasants. In most cases, underutilized  land  is  purchased  and  intensively cultivated,  but  the poorly exploited holdings  of traditional cultivators are disregarded. Furthermore, the new  fruit-growing  estates employ  skilled workers, not traditional cultivators. The specialized  labor force earns attractive salaries and chooses to live in towns rather  than in rural  locales, which accentuates the differences between  its living  conditions  and those  of the traditional farmers.

The  same  situation  that  is  emerging  in  the  Baixo Asu  project can  be observed in the irrigated oases of the semiarid Norte Chico in  Chile and in the oases of northern Patagonia in Argentina. The fruit growers of Chile and Argentina, as established  suppliers  to North  American and European markets, spread benefits to their rural neighbors. Small neighboring  landowners adopt modern  methods  of  fruit production  from the  example  of  the  large export  enterprises,  and  some  have  even  become  their  suppliers.  This  arrangement  implies  that  the  small  producers must  meet  the  standards demanded  by  export markets and  that traditional forms of  production  must be modernized.  A full alteration of long-established  systems  of agricultural production is necessary if commercial fruit production in Brazil is to match the  levels  observed  in  Chile and Argentina and to foster rural growth.

Against  this  background,  the  dry  Northeast  Brazil offers not  only  undeniable  natural advantages  but  also  formidable  structural drawbacks for

commercial  fruit  production.  Fruit-producing companies  have  established themselves  in  areas where  traditional farmers often  supplement  their livelihoods with  hunting,  gathering, collecting, and pastoral activities that have been  more  pervasive  here  than  they  are in  Chile  or Argentina.  For these traditional communities,  water was  envisaged  symbolically  as the  element that should have taken them away from underdevelopment  without changing  their  traditional forms  of  livelihood.  This  goal  has  not  been  possible because water has increasingly become a commodity coveted by imaginative agroentrepreneurs. The dilemma  that emerges is posed in  these  terms: are the  consequences  of agroenterprises for traditional livelihood  so damaging that they should be curtailed  or heavily taxed when partaking  of the irrigation benefits initially  intended  for the  deprived  rural residents? Or should  agribusinesses  operating in depressed areas be encouraged to act as catalysts of change, albeit perhaps as agents of a socially responsible capitalism?

The Chilean  and Argentine  examples  seem  to indicate that the  second alternative is  more beneficial to the  national economy  and opens  paths of development  to  depressed  rural communities.  In  contrast with  Northeast Brazil, the  Chilean  and Argentine  governments  have  tried to improve  the infrastructural  bases of fruit exports by building and maintaining new  roads and by modernizing  port facilities. Fruit, more than any other export item, needs  a  streamlined  distribution  network  to  become  internationally  competitive.  Northeast  Brazil still  lags  behind  the  standards of  efficiency  and infrastructure found  in  Chile and Argentina.

In  the  politically  and  ideologically  charged  debate  about  the  primary beneficiaries  of  public  works,  the  fact that dynamic  economies  contribute more to spread benefits than do those chronically depressed and extremely burdened  with  social costs  is  frequently  forgotten.  New  concepts  of  agricultural productivity  seem  to be  the  only  ones  capable of  bringing  to  the irrigated segment  of  Northeast  Brazil the  much-hoped-for  transformation from ineffective exploitation practices to modernistically conceived agrarian systems. Northeast Brazil still falls short of eradicating poverty, misery, and underdevelopment.  Prolonged  entanglement  in  rhetorical questions  about the purpose of development  will not greatly help to improve the conditions of subsistence cultivators in Northeast Brazil.  Fostering agricultural  modern- ization  will.

## REFERENCES

- Aranha, T. Q., ed. 1991.  A problematica  da seca no Rio Grande do Norte.  Natal, Brazil: Cooperativa Cultural  Universidade Federal  do  Rio Grande do  Norte.
- Bicalho,  A.  M., and  S. W. Hoeffie. 1990. Divergent  trends  in  Brazilian  rural transformation:  capitalised  agriculture  in the  agreste  and sertao of the  Northeast.  Bulletin  of Latin  American  Research 9:49-77.
- DNOCS  (Departamento  Nacional  de  Obras Contra as Secas). 1984. Pensamento  e Diretrizes.  Fortaleza,  Brazil.
- Gomes da Silva, A. 1992. 0  dominio  do processo  de  trabalho  na agricultura  irrigada  do Nordeste: a persistencia  da parceria. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,  Universidade  Estadual de Campinas, Sao Paulo.

- Graziano  da  Silva,  J., ed. 1989. A  irrigaq5o  e  a  problematica  fundiaria  do  Nordeste. Sao  Paulo: Universidade Estadual de  Campinas.
- Grossmann,  W. 1987. A  modernizaq5o  da  agricultura  brasileira  (1960-1980):  anotaq6es  para um debate.  Caderno  Norte-Rio-Grandense  de Temas  Geogrdficos  3:3-10.
- Oliveira,  M. 1988.  Os solos  e o ambiente  agricola  no sistema  Piranhas-Acu.  Mossor6,  Brazil: Escola Superior  de  Agricultura-Mossor6/Fundaq5o Guimaraes  Duque.
- Prado, C. J.  1987. A  revoluq5o  brasileira.  Sao Paulo: Editora Brasiliense.
- Ramos de Souza,  H. 1987. Emprego,  renda  e excedente  comercializavel na agricultura  irrigada do Nordeste.  Recife,  Brazil: PIMES.